  From fairest creatures we desire increase,
  That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
  But as the riper should by time decease,
  His tender heir might bear his memory:
  But thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes,
  Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
  Making a famine where abundance lies,
  Thy self thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel:
  Thou that art now the world's fresh ornament,
  And only herald to the gaudy spring,
  Within thine own bud buriest thy content,
  And tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding:
    Pity the world, or else this glutton be,
    To eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.

  When forty winters shall besiege thy brow,
  And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
  Thy youth's proud livery so gazed on now,
  Will be a tatter'd weed of small worth held:
  Then being asked, where all thy beauty lies,
  Where all the treasure of thy lusty days;
  To say, within thine own deep sunken eyes,
  Were an all-eating shame, and thriftless praise.
  How much more praise deserv'd thy beauty's use,
  If thou couldst answer 'This fair child of mine
  Shall sum my count, and make my old excuse,'
  Proving his beauty by succession thine!
    This were to be new made when thou art old,
    And see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.

  Look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest
  Now is the time that face should form another;
  Whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest,
  Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
  For where is she so fair whose unear'd womb
  Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
  Or who is he so fond will be the tomb,
  Of his self-love to stop posterity?
  Thou art thy mother's glass and she in thee
  Calls back the lovely April of her prime;
  So thou through windows of thine age shalt see,
  Despite of wrinkles this thy golden time.
    But if thou live, remember'd not to be,
    Die single and thine image dies with thee.

  Unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend
  Upon thy self thy beauty's legacy?
  Nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend,
  And being frank she lends to those are free:
  Then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse
  The bounteous largess given thee to give?
  Profitless usurer, why dost thou use
  So great a sum of sums, yet canst not live?
  For having traffic with thy self alone,
  Thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive:
  Then how when nature calls thee to be gone,
  What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
    Thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee,
    Which, used, lives th' executor to be.

  Those hours, that with gentle work did frame
  The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell,
  Will play the tyrants to the very same
  And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
  For never-resting time leads summer on
  To hideous winter, and confounds him there;
  Sap checked with frost, and lusty leaves quite gone,
  Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness every where:
  Then were not summer's distillation left,
  A liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass,
  Beauty's effect with beauty were bereft,
  Nor it, nor no remembrance what it was:
    But flowers distill'd, though they with winter meet,
    Leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.

  Then let not winter's ragged hand deface,
  In thee thy summer, ere thou be distill'd:
  Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
  With beauty's treasure ere it be self-kill'd.
  That use is not forbidden usury,
  Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
  That's for thy self to breed another thee,
  Or ten times happier, be it ten for one;
  Ten times thy self were happier than thou art,
  If ten of thine ten times refigur'd thee:
  Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
  Leaving thee living in posterity?
    Be not self-will'd, for thou art much too fair
    To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.

  Lo! in the orient when the gracious light
  Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
  Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
  Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
  And having climb'd the steep-up heavenly hill,
  Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
  Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
  Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
  But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
  Like feeble age, he reeleth from the day,
  The eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are
  From his low tract, and look another way:
    So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon:
    Unlook'd, on diest unless thou get a son.

  Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
  Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
  Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
  Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
  If the true concord of well-tuned sounds,
  By unions married, do offend thine ear,
  They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
  In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
  Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
  Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
  Resembling sire and child and happy mother,
  Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing:
    Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
    Sings this to thee: 'Thou single wilt prove none.'

  Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye,
  That thou consum'st thy self in single life?
  Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
  The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
  The world will be thy widow and still weep
  That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
  When every private widow well may keep
  By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
  Look! what an unthrift in the world doth spend
  Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it;
  But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
  And kept unused the user so destroys it.
    No love toward others in that bosom sits
    That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.

  For shame! deny that thou bear'st love to any,
  Who for thy self art so unprovident.
  Grant, if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many,
  But that thou none lov'st is most evident:
  For thou art so possess'd with murderous hate,
  That 'gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire,
  Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
  Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
  O! change thy thought, that I may change my mind:
  Shall hate be fairer lodg'd than gentle love?
  Be, as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
  Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
    Make thee another self for love of me,
    That beauty still may live in thine or thee.

  As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st,
  In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
  And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st,
  Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest,
  Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase;
  Without this folly, age, and cold decay:
  If all were minded so, the times should cease
  And threescore year would make the world away.
  Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
  Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
  Look, whom she best endow'd, she gave thee more;
  Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
    She carv'd thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
    Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.

  When I do count the clock that tells the time,
  And see the brave day sunk in hideous night;
  When I behold the violet past prime,
  And sable curls, all silvered o'er with white;
  When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
  Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
  And summer's green all girded up in sheaves,
  Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard,
  Then of thy beauty do I question make,
  That thou among the wastes of time must go,
  Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake
  And die as fast as they see others grow;
    And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
    Save breed, to brave him when he takes thee hence.

  O! that you were your self; but, love you are
  No longer yours, than you your self here live:
  Against this coming end you should prepare,
  And your sweet semblance to some other give:
  So should that beauty which you hold in lease
  Find no determination; then you were
  Yourself again, after yourself's decease,
  When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
  Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
  Which husbandry in honour might uphold,
  Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
  And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
    O! none but unthrifts. Dear my love, you know,
    You had a father: let your son say so.

  Not from the stars do I my judgement pluck;
  And yet methinks I have astronomy,
  But not to tell of good or evil luck,
  Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
  Nor can I fortune to brief minutes tell,
  Pointing to each his thunder, rain and wind,
  Or say with princes if it shall go well
  By oft predict that I in heaven find:
  But from thine eyes my knowledge I derive,
  And constant stars in them I read such art
  As 'Truth and beauty shall together thrive,
  If from thyself, to store thou wouldst convert';
    Or else of thee this I prognosticate:
    'Thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.'

  When I consider every thing that grows
  Holds in perfection but a little moment,
  That this huge stage presenteth nought but shows
  Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
  When I perceive that men as plants increase,
  Cheered and checked even by the self-same sky,
  Vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease,
  And wear their brave state out of memory;
  Then the conceit of this inconstant stay
  Sets you most rich in youth before my sight,
  Where wasteful Time debateth with decay
  To change your day of youth to sullied night,
    And all in war with Time for love of you,
    As he takes from you, I engraft you new.

  But wherefore do not you a mightier way
  Make war upon this bloody tyrant, Time?
  And fortify your self in your decay
  With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
  Now stand you on the top of happy hours,
  And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
  With virtuous wish would bear you living flowers,
  Much liker than your painted counterfeit:
  So should the lines of life that life repair,
  Which this, Time's pencil, or my pupil pen,
  Neither in inward worth nor outward fair,
  Can make you live your self in eyes of men.
    To give away yourself, keeps yourself still,
    And you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.

  Who will believe my verse in time to come,
  If it were fill'd with your most high deserts?
  Though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb
  Which hides your life, and shows not half your parts.
  If I could write the beauty of your eyes,
  And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
  The age to come would say 'This poet lies;
  Such heavenly touches ne'er touch'd earthly faces.'
  So should my papers, yellow'd with their age,
  Be scorn'd, like old men of less truth than tongue,
  And your true rights be term'd a poet's rage
  And stretched metre of an antique song:
    But were some child of yours alive that time,
    You should live twice,--in it, and in my rhyme.

  Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:
  Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
  And summer's lease hath all too short a date:
  Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
  And often is his gold complexion dimm'd,
  And every fair from fair sometime declines,
  By chance, or nature's changing course untrimm'd:
  But thy eternal summer shall not fade,
  Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st,
  Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
  When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st,
    So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,
    So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.

  Devouring Time, blunt thou the lion's paws,
  And make the earth devour her own sweet brood;
  Pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws,
  And burn the long-liv'd phoenix, in her blood;
  Make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleets,
  And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
  To the wide world and all her fading sweets;
  But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
  O! carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,
  Nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen;
  Him in thy course untainted do allow
  For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
    Yet, do thy worst old Time: despite thy wrong,
    My love shall in my verse ever live young.

  A woman's face with nature's own hand painted,
  Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
  A woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted
  With shifting change, as is false women's fashion:
  An eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling,
  Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
  A man in hue all 'hues' in his controlling,
  Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
  And for a woman wert thou first created;
  Till Nature, as she wrought thee, fell a-doting,
  And by addition me of thee defeated,
  By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
    But since she prick'd thee out for women's pleasure,
    Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.

  So is it not with me as with that Muse,
  Stirr'd by a painted beauty to his verse,
  Who heaven itself for ornament doth use
  And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
  Making a couplement of proud compare.
  With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
  With April's first-born flowers, and all things rare,
  That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
  O! let me, true in love, but truly write,
  And then believe me, my love is as fair
  As any mother's child, though not so bright
  As those gold candles fix'd in heaven's air:
    Let them say more that like of hearsay well;
    I will not praise that purpose not to sell.

  My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  So long as youth and thou are of one date;
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  Then look I death my days should expiate.
  For all that beauty that doth cover thee,
  Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
  Which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me:
  How can I then be elder than thou art?
  O! therefore love, be of thyself so wary
  As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
  Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
  As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
    Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain,
    Thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.

  As an unperfect actor on the stage,
  Who with his fear is put beside his part,
  Or some fierce thing replete with too much rage,
  Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
  So I, for fear of trust, forget to say
  The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
  And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,
  O'ercharg'd with burthen of mine own love's might.
  O! let my looks be then the eloquence
  And dumb presagers of my speaking breast,
  Who plead for love, and look for recompense,
  More than that tongue that more hath more express'd.
    O! learn to read what silent love hath writ:
    To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.

  Mine eye hath play'd the painter and hath stell'd,
  Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
  My body is the frame wherein 'tis held,
  And perspective it is best painter's art.
  For through the painter must you see his skill,
  To find where your true image pictur'd lies,
  Which in my bosom's shop is hanging still,
  That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
  Now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done:
  Mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me
  Are windows to my breast, where-through the sun
  Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee;
    Yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art,
    They draw but what they see, know not the heart.

  Let those who are in favour with their stars
  Of public honour and proud titles boast,
  Whilst I, whom fortune of such triumph bars
  Unlook'd for joy in that I honour most.
  Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread
  But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
  And in themselves their pride lies buried,
  For at a frown they in their glory die.
  The painful warrior famoused for fight,
  After a thousand victories once foil'd,
  Is from the book of honour razed quite,
  And all the rest forgot for which he toil'd:
    Then happy I, that love and am belov'd,
    Where I may not remove nor be remov'd.

  Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage
  Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
  To thee I send this written embassage,
  To witness duty, not to show my wit:
  Duty so great, which wit so poor as mine
  May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
  But that I hope some good conceit of thine
  In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it:
  Till whatsoever star that guides my moving,
  Points on me graciously with fair aspect,
  And puts apparel on my tatter'd loving,
  To show me worthy of thy sweet respect:
    Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee;
    Till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.

  Weary with toil, I haste me to my bed,
  The dear respose for limbs with travel tir'd;
  But then begins a journey in my head
  To work my mind, when body's work's expired:
  For then my thoughts--from far where I abide--
  Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
  And keep my drooping eyelids open wide,
  Looking on darkness which the blind do see:
  Save that my soul's imaginary sight
  Presents thy shadow to my sightless view,
  Which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night,
  Makes black night beauteous, and her old face new.
    Lo! thus, by day my limbs, by night my mind,
    For thee, and for myself, no quiet find.

  How can I then return in happy plight,
  That am debarre'd the benefit of rest?
  When day's oppression is not eas'd by night,
  But day by night and night by day oppress'd,
  And each, though enemies to either's reign,
  Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
  The one by toil, the other to complain
  How far I toil, still farther off from thee.
  I tell the day, to please him thou art bright,
  And dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven:
  So flatter I the swart-complexion'd night,
  When sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even.
    But day doth daily draw my sorrows longer,
    And night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.

  When in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes
  I all alone beweep my outcast state,
  And trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries,
  And look upon myself, and curse my fate,
  Wishing me like to one more rich in hope,
  Featur'd like him, like him with friends possess'd,
  Desiring this man's art, and that man's scope,
  With what I most enjoy contented least;
  Yet in these thoughts my self almost despising,
  Haply I think on thee,-- and then my state,
  Like to the lark at break of day arising
  From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;
    For thy sweet love remember'd such wealth brings
    That then I scorn to change my state with kings.

  When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
  I summon up remembrance of things past,
  I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought,
  And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste:
  Then can I drown an eye, unused to flow,
  For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
  And weep afresh love's long since cancell'd woe,
  And moan the expense of many a vanish'd sight:
  Then can I grieve at grievances foregone,
  And heavily from woe to woe tell o'er
  The sad account of fore-bemoaned moan,
  Which I new pay as if not paid before.
    But if the while I think on thee, dear friend,
    All losses are restor'd and sorrows end.

  Thy bosom is endeared with all hearts,
  Which I by lacking have supposed dead;
  And there reigns Love, and all Love's loving parts,
  And all those friends which I thought buried.
  How many a holy and obsequious tear
  Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
  As interest of the dead, which now appear
  But things remov'd that hidden in thee lie!
  Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,
  Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,
  Who all their parts of me to thee did give,
  That due of many now is thine alone:
    Their images I lov'd, I view in thee,
    And thou--all they--hast all the all of me.

  If thou survive my well-contented day,
  When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover
  And shalt by fortune once more re-survey
  These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
  Compare them with the bett'ring of the time,
  And though they be outstripp'd by every pen,
  Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,
  Exceeded by the height of happier men.
  O! then vouchsafe me but this loving thought:
  'Had my friend's Muse grown with this growing age,
  A dearer birth than this his love had brought,
  To march in ranks of better equipage:
    But since he died and poets better prove,
    Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.

  Full many a glorious morning have I seen
  Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
  Kissing with golden face the meadows green,
  Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy;
  Anon permit the basest clouds to ride
  With ugly rack on his celestial face,
  And from the forlorn world his visage hide,
  Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace:
  Even so my sun one early morn did shine,
  With all triumphant splendour on my brow;
  But out! alack! he was but one hour mine,
  The region cloud hath mask'd him from me now.
    Yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth;
    Suns of the world may stain when heaven's sun staineth.

  Why didst thou promise such a beauteous day,
  And make me travel forth without my cloak,
  To let base clouds o'ertake me in my way,
  Hiding thy bravery in their rotten smoke?
  'Tis not enough that through the cloud thou break,
  To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
  For no man well of such a salve can speak,
  That heals the wound, and cures not the disgrace:
  Nor can thy shame give physic to my grief;
  Though thou repent, yet I have still the loss:
  The offender's sorrow lends but weak relief
  To him that bears the strong offence's cross.
    Ah! but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,
    And they are rich and ransom all ill deeds.

  No more be griev'd at that which thou hast done:
  Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud:
  Clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun,
  And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
  All men make faults, and even I in this,
  Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
  Myself corrupting, salving thy amiss,
  Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are;
  For to thy sensual fault I bring in sense,--
  Thy adverse party is thy advocate,--
  And 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence:
  Such civil war is in my love and hate,
    That I an accessary needs must be,
    To that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.

  Let me confess that we two must be twain,
  Although our undivided loves are one:
  So shall those blots that do with me remain,
  Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
  In our two loves there is but one respect,
  Though in our lives a separable spite,
  Which though it alter not love's sole effect,
  Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
  I may not evermore acknowledge thee,
  Lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame,
  Nor thou with public kindness honour me,
  Unless thou take that honour from thy name:
    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,
    As thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

  As a decrepit father takes delight
  To see his active child do deeds of youth,
  So I, made lame by Fortune's dearest spite,
  Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth;
  For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit,
  Or any of these all, or all, or more,
  Entitled in thy parts, do crowned sit,
  I make my love engrafted, to this store:
  So then I am not lame, poor, nor despis'd,
  Whilst that this shadow doth such substance give
  That I in thy abundance am suffic'd,
  And by a part of all thy glory live.
    Look what is best, that best I wish in thee:
    This wish I have; then ten times happy me!

  How can my muse want subject to invent,
  While thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse
  Thine own sweet argument, too excellent
  For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
  O! give thy self the thanks, if aught in me
  Worthy perusal stand against thy sight;
  For who's so dumb that cannot write to thee,
  When thou thy self dost give invention light?
  Be thou the tenth Muse, ten times more in worth
  Than those old nine which rhymers invocate;
  And he that calls on thee, let him bring forth
  Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
    If my slight muse do please these curious days,
    The pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.

  O! how thy worth with manners may I sing,
  When thou art all the better part of me?
  What can mine own praise to mine own self bring?
  And what is't but mine own when I praise thee?
  Even for this, let us divided live,
  And our dear love lose name of single one,
  That by this separation I may give
  That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
  O absence! what a torment wouldst thou prove,
  Were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave,
  To entertain the time with thoughts of love,
  Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
    And that thou teachest how to make one twain,
    By praising him here who doth hence remain.

  Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all;
  What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
  No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call;
  All mine was thine, before thou hadst this more.
  Then, if for my love, thou my love receivest,
  I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest;
  But yet be blam'd, if thou thy self deceivest
  By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
  I do forgive thy robbery, gentle thief,
  Although thou steal thee all my poverty:
  And yet, love knows it is a greater grief
  To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury.
    Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
    Kill me with spites yet we must not be foes.

  Those pretty wrongs that liberty commits,
  When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
  Thy beauty, and thy years full well befits,
  For still temptation follows where thou art.
  Gentle thou art, and therefore to be won,
  Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assail'd;
  And when a woman woos, what woman's son
  Will sourly leave her till he have prevail'd?
  Ay me! but yet thou mightst my seat forbear,
  And chide thy beauty and thy straying youth,
  Who lead thee in their riot even there
  Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:--
    Hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee,
    Thine by thy beauty being false to me.

  That thou hast her it is not all my grief,
  And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
  That she hath thee is of my wailing chief,
  A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
  Loving offenders thus I will excuse ye:
  Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her;
  And for my sake even so doth she abuse me,
  Suffering my friend for my sake to approve her.
  If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,
  And losing her, my friend hath found that loss;
  Both find each other, and I lose both twain,
  And both for my sake lay on me this cross:
    But here's the joy; my friend and I are one;
    Sweet flattery! then she loves but me alone.

  When most I wink, then do mine eyes best see,
  For all the day they view things unrespected;
  But when I sleep, in dreams they look on thee,
  And darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
  Then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright,
  How would thy shadow's form form happy show
  To the clear day with thy much clearer light,
  When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
  How would, I say, mine eyes be blessed made
  By looking on thee in the living day,
  When in dead night thy fair imperfect shade
  Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
    All days are nights to see till I see thee,
    And nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.

  If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
  Injurious distance should not stop my way;
  For then despite of space I would be brought,
  From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
  No matter then although my foot did stand
  Upon the farthest earth remov'd from thee;
  For nimble thought can jump both sea and land,
  As soon as think the place where he would be.
  But, ah! thought kills me that I am not thought,
  To leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone,
  But that so much of earth and water wrought,
  I must attend time's leisure with my moan;
    Receiving nought by elements so slow
    But heavy tears, badges of either's woe.

  The other two, slight air, and purging fire
  Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
  The first my thought, the other my desire,
  These present-absent with swift motion slide.
  For when these quicker elements are gone
  In tender embassy of love to thee,
  My life, being made of four, with two alone
  Sinks down to death, oppress'd with melancholy;
  Until life's composition be recur'd
  By those swift messengers return'd from thee,
  Who even but now come back again, assur'd,
  Of thy fair health, recounting it to me:
    This told, I joy; but then no longer glad,
    I send them back again, and straight grow sad.

  Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war,
  How to divide the conquest of thy sight;
  Mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar,
  My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
  My heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie,--
  A closet never pierc'd with crystal eyes--
  But the defendant doth that plea deny,
  And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
  To side this title is impannelled
  A quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart;
  And by their verdict is determined
  The clear eye's moiety, and the dear heart's part:
    As thus; mine eye's due is thy outward part,
    And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.

  Betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took,
  And each doth good turns now unto the other:
  When that mine eye is famish'd for a look,
  Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
  With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,
  And to the painted banquet bids my heart;
  Another time mine eye is my heart's guest,
  And in his thoughts of love doth share a part:
  So, either by thy picture or my love,
  Thy self away, art present still with me;
  For thou not farther than my thoughts canst move,
  And I am still with them, and they with thee;
    Or, if they sleep, thy picture in my sight
    Awakes my heart, to heart's and eye's delight.

  How careful was I when I took my way,
  Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
  That to my use it might unused stay
  From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
  But thou, to whom my jewels trifles are,
  Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
  Thou best of dearest, and mine only care,
  Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
  Thee have I not lock'd up in any chest,
  Save where thou art not, though I feel thou art,
  Within the gentle closure of my breast,
  From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
    And even thence thou wilt be stol'n I fear,
    For truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.

  Against that time, if ever that time come,
  When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
  When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,
  Call'd to that audit by advis'd respects;
  Against that time when thou shalt strangely pass,
  And scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye,
  When love, converted from the thing it was,
  Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
  Against that time do I ensconce me here,
  Within the knowledge of mine own desert,
  And this my hand, against my self uprear,
  To guard the lawful reasons on thy part:
    To leave poor me thou hast the strength of laws,
    Since why to love I can allege no cause.

  How heavy do I journey on the way,
  When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
  Doth teach that ease and that repose to say,
  'Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend!'
  The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
  Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
  As if by some instinct the wretch did know
  His rider lov'd not speed, being made from thee:
  The bloody spur cannot provoke him on,
  That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
  Which heavily he answers with a groan,
  More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
    For that same groan doth put this in my mind,
    My grief lies onward, and my joy behind.

  Thus can my love excuse the slow offence
  Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
  From where thou art why should I haste me thence?
  Till I return, of posting is no need.
  O! what excuse will my poor beast then find,
  When swift extremity can seem but slow?
  Then should I spur, though mounted on the wind,
  In winged speed no motion shall I know,
  Then can no horse with my desire keep pace;
  Therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made,
  Shall neigh--no dull flesh--in his fiery race;
  But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,--
    'Since from thee going, he went wilful-slow,
    Towards thee I'll run, and give him leave to go.'

  So am I as the rich, whose blessed key,
  Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
  The which he will not every hour survey,
  For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
  Therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare,
  Since, seldom coming in that long year set,
  Like stones of worth they thinly placed are,
  Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
  So is the time that keeps you as my chest,
  Or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide,
  To make some special instant special-blest,
  By new unfolding his imprison'd pride.
    Blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope,
    Being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.

  What is your substance, whereof are you made,
  That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
  Since every one, hath every one, one shade,
  And you but one, can every shadow lend.
  Describe Adonis, and the counterfeit
  Is poorly imitated after you;
  On Helen's cheek all art of beauty set,
  And you in Grecian tires are painted new:
  Speak of the spring, and foison of the year,
  The one doth shadow of your beauty show,
  The other as your bounty doth appear;
  And you in every blessed shape we know.
    In all external grace you have some part,
    But you like none, none you, for constant heart.

  O! how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
  By that sweet ornament which truth doth give.
  The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
  For that sweet odour, which doth in it live.
  The canker blooms have full as deep a dye
  As the perfumed tincture of the roses.
  Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
  When summer's breath their masked buds discloses:
  But, for their virtue only is their show,
  They live unwoo'd, and unrespected fade;
  Die to themselves. Sweet roses do not so;
  Of their sweet deaths, are sweetest odours made:
    And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
    When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.

  Not marble, nor the gilded monuments
  Of princes, shall outlive this powerful rhyme;
  But you shall shine more bright in these contents
  Than unswept stone, besmear'd with sluttish time.
  When wasteful war shall statues overturn,
  And broils root out the work of masonry,
  Nor Mars his sword, nor war's quick fire shall burn
  The living record of your memory.
  'Gainst death, and all-oblivious enmity
  Shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room
  Even in the eyes of all posterity
  That wear this world out to the ending doom.
    So, till the judgment that yourself arise,
    You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.

  Sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said
  Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
  Which but to-day by feeding is allay'd,
  To-morrow sharpened in his former might:
  So, love, be thou, although to-day thou fill
  Thy hungry eyes, even till they wink with fulness,
  To-morrow see again, and do not kill
  The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness.
  Let this sad interim like the ocean be
  Which parts the shore, where two contracted new
  Come daily to the banks, that when they see
  Return of love, more blest may be the view;
    Or call it winter, which being full of care,
    Makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.

  Being your slave what should I do but tend,
  Upon the hours, and times of your desire?
  I have no precious time at all to spend;
  Nor services to do, till you require.
  Nor dare I chide the world-without-end hour,
  Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
  Nor think the bitterness of absence sour,
  When you have bid your servant once adieu;
  Nor dare I question with my jealous thought
  Where you may be, or your affairs suppose,
  But, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought
  Save, where you are, how happy you make those.
    So true a fool is love, that in your will,
    Though you do anything, he thinks no ill.

  That god forbid, that made me first your slave,
  I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
  Or at your hand the account of hours to crave,
  Being your vassal, bound to stay your leisure!
  O! let me suffer, being at your beck,
  The imprison'd absence of your liberty;
  And patience, tame to sufferance, bide each check,
  Without accusing you of injury.
  Be where you list, your charter is so strong
  That you yourself may privilage your time
  To what you will; to you it doth belong
  Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
    I am to wait, though waiting so be hell,
    Not blame your pleasure be it ill or well.

  If there be nothing new, but that which is
  Hath been before, how are our brains beguil'd,
  Which labouring for invention bear amiss
  The second burthen of a former child!
  O! that record could with a backward look,
  Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
  Show me your image in some antique book,
  Since mind at first in character was done!
  That I might see what the old world could say
  To this composed wonder of your frame;
  Wh'r we are mended, or wh'r better they,
  Or whether revolution be the same.
    O! sure I am the wits of former days,
    To subjects worse have given admiring praise.

  Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore,
  So do our minutes hasten to their end;
  Each changing place with that which goes before,
  In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
  Nativity, once in the main of light,
  Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crown'd,
  Crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight,
  And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
  Time doth transfix the flourish set on youth
  And delves the parallels in beauty's brow,
  Feeds on the rarities of nature's truth,
  And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow:
    And yet to times in hope, my verse shall stand.
    Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.

  Is it thy will, thy image should keep open
  My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
  Dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken,
  While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
  Is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee
  So far from home into my deeds to pry,
  To find out shames and idle hours in me,
  The scope and tenure of thy jealousy?
  O, no! thy love, though much, is not so great:
  It is my love that keeps mine eye awake:
  Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,
  To play the watchman ever for thy sake:
    For thee watch I, whilst thou dost wake elsewhere,
    From me far off, with others all too near.

  Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye
  And all my soul, and all my every part;
  And for this sin there is no remedy,
  It is so grounded inward in my heart.
  Methinks no face so gracious is as mine,
  No shape so true, no truth of such account;
  And for myself mine own worth do define,
  As I all other in all worths surmount.
  But when my glass shows me myself indeed
  Beated and chopp'd with tanned antiquity,
  Mine own self-love quite contrary I read;
  Self so self-loving were iniquity.
    'Tis thee,--myself,--that for myself I praise,
    Painting my age with beauty of thy days.

  Against my love shall be as I am now,
  With Time's injurious hand crush'd and o'erworn;
  When hours have drain'd his blood and fill'd his brow
  With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
  Hath travell'd on to age's steepy night;
  And all those beauties whereof now he's king
  Are vanishing, or vanished out of sight,
  Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
  For such a time do I now fortify
  Against confounding age's cruel knife,
  That he shall never cut from memory
  My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life:
    His beauty shall in these black lines be seen,
    And they shall live, and he in them still green.

  When I have seen by Time's fell hand defac'd
  The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age;
  When sometime lofty towers I see down-raz'd,
  And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
  When I have seen the hungry ocean gain
  Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
  And the firm soil win of the watery main,
  Increasing store with loss, and loss with store;
  When I have seen such interchange of state,
  Or state itself confounded, to decay;
  Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate--
  That Time will come and take my love away.
    This thought is as a death which cannot choose
    But weep to have, that which it fears to lose.

  Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea,
  But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
  How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
  Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
  O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out,
  Against the wrackful siege of battering days,
  When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
  Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays?
  O fearful meditation! where, alack,
  Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid?
  Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
  Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
    O! none, unless this miracle have might,
    That in black ink my love may still shine bright.

  Tired with all these, for restful death I cry,
  As to behold desert a beggar born,
  And needy nothing trimm'd in jollity,
  And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
  And gilded honour shamefully misplac'd,
  And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
  And right perfection wrongfully disgrac'd,
  And strength by limping sway disabled
  And art made tongue-tied by authority,
  And folly--doctor-like--controlling skill,
  And simple truth miscall'd simplicity,
  And captive good attending captain ill:
    Tir'd with all these, from these would I be gone,
    Save that, to die, I leave my love alone.

  Ah! wherefore with infection should he live,
  And with his presence grace impiety,
  That sin by him advantage should achieve,
  And lace itself with his society?
  Why should false painting imitate his cheek,
  And steel dead seeming of his living hue?
  Why should poor beauty indirectly seek
  Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
  Why should he live, now Nature bankrupt is,
  Beggar'd of blood to blush through lively veins?
  For she hath no exchequer now but his,
  And proud of many, lives upon his gains.
    O! him she stores, to show what wealth she had
    In days long since, before these last so bad.

  Thus is his cheek the map of days outworn,
  When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
  Before these bastard signs of fair were born,
  Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
  Before the golden tresses of the dead,
  The right of sepulchres, were shorn away,
  To live a second life on second head;
  Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay:
  In him those holy antique hours are seen,
  Without all ornament, itself and true,
  Making no summer of another's green,
  Robbing no old to dress his beauty new;
    And him as for a map doth Nature store,
    To show false Art what beauty was of yore.

  Those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view
  Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend;
  All tongues--the voice of souls--give thee that due,
  Uttering bare truth, even so as foes commend.
  Thy outward thus with outward praise is crown'd;
  But those same tongues, that give thee so thine own,
  In other accents do this praise confound
  By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
  They look into the beauty of thy mind,
  And that in guess they measure by thy deeds;
  Then--churls--their thoughts, although their eyes were kind,
  To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds:
    But why thy odour matcheth not thy show,
    The soil is this, that thou dost common grow.

  That thou art blam'd shall not be thy defect,
  For slander's mark was ever yet the fair;
  The ornament of beauty is suspect,
  A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
  So thou be good, slander doth but approve
  Thy worth the greater being woo'd of time;
  For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,
  And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
  Thou hast passed by the ambush of young days
  Either not assail'd, or victor being charg'd;
  Yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise,
  To tie up envy, evermore enlarg'd,
    If some suspect of ill mask'd not thy show,
    Then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.

  No longer mourn for me when I am dead
  Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
  Give warning to the world that I am fled
  From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell:
  Nay, if you read this line, remember not
  The hand that writ it, for I love you so,
  That I in your sweet thoughts would be forgot,
  If thinking on me then should make you woe.
  O! if,--I say you look upon this verse,
  When I perhaps compounded am with clay,
  Do not so much as my poor name rehearse;
  But let your love even with my life decay;
    Lest the wise world should look into your moan,
    And mock you with me after I am gone.

  O! lest the world should task you to recite
  What merit lived in me, that you should love
  After my death,--dear love, forget me quite,
  For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
  Unless you would devise some virtuous lie,
  To do more for me than mine own desert,
  And hang more praise upon deceased I
  Than niggard truth would willingly impart:
  O! lest your true love may seem false in this
  That you for love speak well of me untrue,
  My name be buried where my body is,
  And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
    For I am shamed by that which I bring forth,
    And so should you, to love things nothing worth.

  That time of year thou mayst in me behold
  When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
  Upon those boughs which shake against the cold,
  Bare ruin'd choirs, where late the sweet birds sang.
  In me thou see'st the twilight of such day
  As after sunset fadeth in the west;
  Which by and by black night doth take away,
  Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
  In me thou see'st the glowing of such fire,
  That on the ashes of his youth doth lie,
  As the death-bed, whereon it must expire,
  Consum'd with that which it was nourish'd by.
    This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,
    To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.

  But be contented: when that fell arrest
  Without all bail shall carry me away,
  My life hath in this line some interest,
  Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
  When thou reviewest this, thou dost review
  The very part was consecrate to thee:
  The earth can have but earth, which is his due;
  My spirit is thine, the better part of me:
  So then thou hast but lost the dregs of life,
  The prey of worms, my body being dead;
  The coward conquest of a wretch's knife,
  Too base of thee to be remembered.
    The worth of that is that which it contains,
    And that is this, and this with thee remains.

  So are you to my thoughts as food to life,
  Or as sweet-season'd showers are to the ground;
  And for the peace of you I hold such strife
  As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found.
  Now proud as an enjoyer, and anon
  Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
  Now counting best to be with you alone,
  Then better'd that the world may see my pleasure:
  Sometime all full with feasting on your sight,
  And by and by clean starved for a look;
  Possessing or pursuing no delight,
  Save what is had, or must from you be took.
    Thus do I pine and surfeit day by day,
    Or gluttoning on all, or all away.

  Why is my verse so barren of new pride,
  So far from variation or quick change?
  Why with the time do I not glance aside
  To new-found methods, and to compounds strange?
  Why write I still all one, ever the same,
  And keep invention in a noted weed,
  That every word doth almost tell my name,
  Showing their birth, and where they did proceed?
  O! know sweet love I always write of you,
  And you and love are still my argument;
  So all my best is dressing old words new,
  Spending again what is already spent:
    For as the sun is daily new and old,
    So is my love still telling what is told.

  Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
  Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
  These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
  And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
  The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
  Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
  Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
  Time's thievish progress to eternity.
  Look! what thy memory cannot contain,
  Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
  Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain,
  To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
    These offices, so oft as thou wilt look,
    Shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.

  So oft have I invoked thee for my Muse,
  And found such fair assistance in my verse
  As every alien pen hath got my use
  And under thee their poesy disperse.
  Thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing
  And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
  Have added feathers to the learned's wing
  And given grace a double majesty.
  Yet be most proud of that which I compile,
  Whose influence is thine, and born of thee:
  In others' works thou dost but mend the style,
  And arts with thy sweet graces graced be;
    But thou art all my art, and dost advance
    As high as learning, my rude ignorance.

  Whilst I alone did call upon thy aid,
  My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
  But now my gracious numbers are decay'd,
  And my sick Muse doth give an other place.
  I grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument
  Deserves the travail of a worthier pen;
  Yet what of thee thy poet doth invent
  He robs thee of, and pays it thee again.
  He lends thee virtue, and he stole that word
  From thy behaviour; beauty doth he give,
  And found it in thy cheek: he can afford
  No praise to thee, but what in thee doth live.
    Then thank him not for that which he doth say,
    Since what he owes thee, thou thyself dost pay.

  O! how I faint when I of you do write,
  Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
  And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
  To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame!
  But since your worth--wide as the ocean is,--
  The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
  My saucy bark, inferior far to his,
  On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
  Your shallowest help will hold me up afloat,
  Whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride;
  Or, being wrack'd, I am a worthless boat,
  He of tall building, and of goodly pride:
    Then if he thrive and I be cast away,
    The worst was this,--my love was my decay.

  Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
  Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
  From hence your memory death cannot take,
  Although in me each part will be forgotten.
  Your name from hence immortal life shall have,
  Though I, once gone, to all the world must die:
  The earth can yield me but a common grave,
  When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
  Your monument shall be my gentle verse,
  Which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read;
  And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
  When all the breathers of this world are dead;
    You still shall live,--such virtue hath my pen,--
    Where breath most breathes, even in the mouths of men.

  I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
  And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
  The dedicated words which writers use
  Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
  Thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue,
  Finding thy worth a limit past my praise;
  And therefore art enforced to seek anew
  Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
  And do so, love; yet when they have devis'd,
  What strained touches rhetoric can lend,
  Thou truly fair, wert truly sympathiz'd
  In true plain words, by thy true-telling friend;
    And their gross painting might be better us'd
    Where cheeks need blood; in thee it is abus'd.

  I never saw that you did painting need,
  And therefore to your fair no painting set;
  I found, or thought I found, you did exceed
  That barren tender of a poet's debt:
  And therefore have I slept in your report,
  That you yourself, being extant, well might show
  How far a modern quill doth come too short,
  Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
  This silence for my sin you did impute,
  Which shall be most my glory being dumb;
  For I impair not beauty being mute,
  When others would give life, and bring a tomb.
    There lives more life in one of your fair eyes
    Than both your poets can in praise devise.

  Who is it that says most, which can say more,
  Than this rich praise,--that you alone, are you?
  In whose confine immured is the store
  Which should example where your equal grew.
  Lean penury within that pen doth dwell
  That to his subject lends not some small glory;
  But he that writes of you, if he can tell
  That you are you, so dignifies his story,
  Let him but copy what in you is writ,
  Not making worse what nature made so clear,
  And such a counterpart shall fame his wit,
  Making his style admired every where.
    You to your beauteous blessings add a curse,
    Being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.

  My tongue-tied Muse in manners holds her still,
  While comments of your praise richly compil'd,
  Reserve their character with golden quill,
  And precious phrase by all the Muses fil'd.
  I think good thoughts, whilst others write good words,
  And like unlettered clerk still cry 'Amen'
  To every hymn that able spirit affords,
  In polish'd form of well-refined pen.
  Hearing you praised, I say ''tis so, 'tis true,'
  And to the most of praise add something more;
  But that is in my thought, whose love to you,
  Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
    Then others, for the breath of words respect,
    Me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.

  Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
  Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
  That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
  Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
  Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
  Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
  No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
  Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
  He, nor that affable familiar ghost
  Which nightly gulls him with intelligence,
  As victors of my silence cannot boast;
  I was not sick of any fear from thence:
    But when your countenance fill'd up his line,
    Then lacked I matter; that enfeebled mine.

  Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
  And like enough thou know'st thy estimate,
  The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
  My bonds in thee are all determinate.
  For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
  And for that riches where is my deserving?
  The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
  And so my patent back again is swerving.
  Thy self thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing,
  Or me to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
  So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
  Comes home again, on better judgement making.
    Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter,
    In sleep a king, but waking no such matter.

  When thou shalt be dispos'd to set me light,
  And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
  Upon thy side, against myself I'll fight,
  And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
  With mine own weakness, being best acquainted,
  Upon thy part I can set down a story
  Of faults conceal'd, wherein I am attainted;
  That thou in losing me shalt win much glory:
  And I by this will be a gainer too;
  For bending all my loving thoughts on thee,
  The injuries that to myself I do,
  Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
    Such is my love, to thee I so belong,
    That for thy right, myself will bear all wrong.

  Say that thou didst forsake me for some fault,
  And I will comment upon that offence:
  Speak of my lameness, and I straight will halt,
  Against thy reasons making no defence.
  Thou canst not love disgrace me half so ill,
  To set a form upon desired change,
  As I'll myself disgrace; knowing thy will,
  I will acquaintance strangle, and look strange;
  Be absent from thy walks; and in my tongue
  Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,
  Lest I, too much profane, should do it wrong,
  And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
    For thee, against my self I'll vow debate,
    For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.

  Then hate me when thou wilt; if ever, now;
  Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
  Join with the spite of fortune, make me bow,
  And do not drop in for an after-loss:
  Ah! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow,
  Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe;
  Give not a windy night a rainy morrow,
  To linger out a purpos'd overthrow.
  If thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last,
  When other petty griefs have done their spite,
  But in the onset come: so shall I taste
  At first the very worst of fortune's might;
    And other strains of woe, which now seem woe,
    Compar'd with loss of thee, will not seem so.

  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
  Some in their garments though new-fangled ill;
  Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
  And every humour hath his adjunct pleasure,
  Wherein it finds a joy above the rest:
  But these particulars are not my measure,
  All these I better in one general best.
  Thy love is better than high birth to me,
  Richer than wealth, prouder than garments' costs,
  Of more delight than hawks and horses be;
  And having thee, of all men's pride I boast:
    Wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take
    All this away, and me most wretched make.

  But do thy worst to steal thyself away,
  For term of life thou art assured mine;
  And life no longer than thy love will stay,
  For it depends upon that love of thine.
  Then need I not to fear the worst of wrongs,
  When in the least of them my life hath end.
  I see a better state to me belongs
  Than that which on thy humour doth depend:
  Thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind,
  Since that my life on thy revolt doth lie.
  O! what a happy title do I find,
  Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
    But what's so blessed-fair that fears no blot?
    Thou mayst be false, and yet I know it not.

  So shall I live, supposing thou art true,
  Like a deceived husband; so love's face
  May still seem love to me, though alter'd new;
  Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place:
  For there can live no hatred in thine eye,
  Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
  In many's looks, the false heart's history
  Is writ in moods, and frowns, and wrinkles strange.
  But heaven in thy creation did decree
  That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell;
  Whate'er thy thoughts, or thy heart's workings be,
  Thy looks should nothing thence, but sweetness tell.
    How like Eve's apple doth thy beauty grow,
    If thy sweet virtue answer not thy show!

  They that have power to hurt, and will do none,
  That do not do the thing they most do show,
  Who, moving others, are themselves as stone,
  Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow;
  They rightly do inherit heaven's graces,
  And husband nature's riches from expense;
  They are the lords and owners of their faces,
  Others, but stewards of their excellence.
  The summer's flower is to the summer sweet,
  Though to itself, it only live and die,
  But if that flower with base infection meet,
  The basest weed outbraves his dignity:
    For sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds;
    Lilies that fester, smell far worse than weeds.

  How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
  Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
  Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
  O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose.
  That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
  Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
  Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise;
  Naming thy name, blesses an ill report.
  O! what a mansion have those vices got
  Which for their habitation chose out thee,
  Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot
  And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
    Take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege;
    The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge.

  Some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness;
  Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport;
  Both grace and faults are lov'd of more and less:
  Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
  As on the finger of a throned queen
  The basest jewel will be well esteem'd,
  So are those errors that in thee are seen
  To truths translated, and for true things deem'd.
  How many lambs might the stern wolf betray,
  If like a lamb he could his looks translate!
  How many gazers mightst thou lead away,
  if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
    But do not so; I love thee in such sort,
    As, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.

  How like a winter hath my absence been
  From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
  What freezings have I felt, what dark days seen!
  What old December's bareness everywhere!
  And yet this time removed was summer's time;
  The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
  Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
  Like widow'd wombs after their lords' decease:
  Yet this abundant issue seem'd to me
  But hope of orphans, and unfather'd fruit;
  For summer and his pleasures wait on thee,
  And, thou away, the very birds are mute:
    Or, if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer,
    That leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.

  From you have I been absent in the spring,
  When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim,
  Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
  That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
  Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
  Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
  Could make me any summer's story tell,
  Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
  Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
  Nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose;
  They were but sweet, but figures of delight,
  Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
    Yet seem'd it winter still, and you away,
    As with your shadow I with these did play.

  The forward violet thus did I chide:
  Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
  If not from my love's breath? The purple pride
  Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
  In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dy'd.
  The lily I condemned for thy hand,
  And buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair;
  The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
  One blushing shame, another white despair;
  A third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both,
  And to his robbery had annex'd thy breath;
  But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
  A vengeful canker eat him up to death.
    More flowers I noted, yet I none could see,
    But sweet, or colour it had stol'n from thee.

  Where art thou Muse that thou forget'st so long,
  To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
  Spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song,
  Darkening thy power to lend base subjects light?
  Return forgetful Muse, and straight redeem,
  In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
  Sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem
  And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
  Rise, resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,
  If Time have any wrinkle graven there;
  If any, be a satire to decay,
  And make time's spoils despised every where.
    Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,
    So thou prevent'st his scythe and crooked knife.

  O truant Muse what shall be thy amends
  For thy neglect of truth in beauty dy'd?
  Both truth and beauty on my love depends;
  So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
  Make answer Muse: wilt thou not haply say,
  'Truth needs no colour, with his colour fix'd;
  Beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay;
  But best is best, if never intermix'd'?
  Because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb?
  Excuse not silence so, for't lies in thee
  To make him much outlive a gilded tomb
  And to be prais'd of ages yet to be.
    Then do thy office, Muse; I teach thee how
    To make him seem long hence as he shows now.

  My love is strengthen'd, though more weak in seeming;
  I love not less, though less the show appear;
  That love is merchandiz'd, whose rich esteeming,
  The owner's tongue doth publish every where.
  Our love was new, and then but in the spring,
  When I was wont to greet it with my lays;
  As Philomel in summer's front doth sing,
  And stops her pipe in growth of riper days:
  Not that the summer is less pleasant now
  Than when her mournful hymns did hush the night,
  But that wild music burthens every bough,
  And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
    Therefore like her, I sometime hold my tongue:
    Because I would not dull you with my song.

  Alack! what poverty my Muse brings forth,
  That having such a scope to show her pride,
  The argument, all bare, is of more worth
  Than when it hath my added praise beside!
  O! blame me not, if I no more can write!
  Look in your glass, and there appears a face
  That over-goes my blunt invention quite,
  Dulling my lines, and doing me disgrace.
  Were it not sinful then, striving to mend,
  To mar the subject that before was well?
  For to no other pass my verses tend
  Than of your graces and your gifts to tell;
    And more, much more, than in my verse can sit,
    Your own glass shows you when you look in it.

  To me, fair friend, you never can be old,
  For as you were when first your eye I ey'd,
  Such seems your beauty still. Three winters cold,
  Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
  Three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turn'd,
  In process of the seasons have I seen,
  Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burn'd,
  Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
  Ah! yet doth beauty like a dial-hand,
  Steal from his figure, and no pace perceiv'd;
  So your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand,
  Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceiv'd:
    For fear of which, hear this thou age unbred:
    Ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.

  Let not my love be call'd idolatry,
  Nor my beloved as an idol show,
  Since all alike my songs and praises be
  To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
  Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,
  Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
  Therefore my verse to constancy confin'd,
  One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
  'Fair, kind, and true,' is all my argument,
  'Fair, kind, and true,' varying to other words;
  And in this change is my invention spent,
  Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
    Fair, kind, and true, have often liv'd alone,
    Which three till now, never kept seat in one.

  When in the chronicle of wasted time
  I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
  And beauty making beautiful old rime,
  In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
  Then, in the blazon of sweet beauty's best,
  Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
  I see their antique pen would have express'd
  Even such a beauty as you master now.
  So all their praises are but prophecies
  Of this our time, all you prefiguring;
  And for they looked but with divining eyes,
  They had not skill enough your worth to sing:
    For we, which now behold these present days,
    Have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.

  Not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul
  Of the wide world dreaming on things to come,
  Can yet the lease of my true love control,
  Supposed as forfeit to a confin'd doom.
  The mortal moon hath her eclipse endur'd,
  And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
  Incertainties now crown themselves assur'd,
  And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
  Now with the drops of this most balmy time,
  My love looks fresh, and Death to me subscribes,
  Since, spite of him, I'll live in this poor rime,
  While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes:
    And thou in this shalt find thy monument,
    When tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.

  What's in the brain, that ink may character,
  Which hath not figur'd to thee my true spirit?
  What's new to speak, what now to register,
  That may express my love, or thy dear merit?
  Nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine,
  I must each day say o'er the very same;
  Counting no old thing old, thou mine, I thine,
  Even as when first I hallow'd thy fair name.
  So that eternal love in love's fresh case,
  Weighs not the dust and injury of age,
  Nor gives to necessary wrinkles place,
  But makes antiquity for aye his page;
    Finding the first conceit of love there bred,
    Where time and outward form would show it dead.

  O! never say that I was false of heart,
  Though absence seem'd my flame to qualify,
  As easy might I from my self depart
  As from my soul which in thy breast doth lie:
  That is my home of love: if I have rang'd,
  Like him that travels, I return again;
  Just to the time, not with the time exchang'd,
  So that myself bring water for my stain.
  Never believe though in my nature reign'd,
  All frailties that besiege all kinds of blood,
  That it could so preposterously be stain'd,
  To leave for nothing all thy sum of good;
    For nothing this wide universe I call,
    Save thou, my rose, in it thou art my all.

  Alas! 'tis true, I have gone here and there,
  And made my self a motley to the view,
  Gor'd mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear,
  Made old offences of affections new;
  Most true it is, that I have look'd on truth
  Askance and strangely; but, by all above,
  These blenches gave my heart another youth,
  And worse essays prov'd thee my best of love.
  Now all is done, save what shall have no end:
  Mine appetite I never more will grind
  On newer proof, to try an older friend,
  A god in love, to whom I am confin'd.
    Then give me welcome, next my heaven the best,
    Even to thy pure and most most loving breast.

  O! for my sake do you with Fortune chide,
  The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
  That did not better for my life provide
  Than public means which public manners breeds.
  Thence comes it that my name receives a brand,
  And almost thence my nature is subdu'd
  To what it works in, like the dyer's hand:
  Pity me, then, and wish I were renew'd;
  Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink,
  Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection;
  No bitterness that I will bitter think,
  Nor double penance, to correct correction.
    Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye,
    Even that your pity is enough to cure me.

  Your love and pity doth the impression fill,
  Which vulgar scandal stamp'd upon my brow;
  For what care I who calls me well or ill,
  So you o'er-green my bad, my good allow?
  You are my all-the-world, and I must strive
  To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
  None else to me, nor I to none alive,
  That my steel'd sense or changes right or wrong.
  In so profound abysm I throw all care
  Of others' voices, that my adder's sense
  To critic and to flatterer stopped are.
  Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
    You are so strongly in my purpose bred,
    That all the world besides methinks are dead.

  Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind;
  And that which governs me to go about
  Doth part his function and is partly blind,
  Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
  For it no form delivers to the heart
  Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch:
  Of his quick objects hath the mind no part,
  Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch;
  For if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight,
  The most sweet favour or deformed'st creature,
  The mountain or the sea, the day or night:
  The crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
    Incapable of more, replete with you,
    My most true mind thus maketh mine untrue.

  Or whether doth my mind, being crown'd with you,
  Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
  Or whether shall I say, mine eye saith true,
  And that your love taught it this alchemy,
  To make of monsters and things indigest
  Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
  Creating every bad a perfect best,
  As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
  O! 'tis the first, 'tis flattery in my seeing,
  And my great mind most kingly drinks it up:
  Mine eye well knows what with his gust is 'greeing,
  And to his palate doth prepare the cup:
    If it be poison'd, 'tis the lesser sin
    That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.

  Those lines that I before have writ do lie,
  Even those that said I could not love you dearer:
  Yet then my judgment knew no reason why
  My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
  But reckoning Time, whose million'd accidents
  Creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings,
  Tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents,
  Divert strong minds to the course of altering things;
  Alas! why fearing of Time's tyranny,
  Might I not then say, 'Now I love you best,'
  When I was certain o'er incertainty,
  Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
    Love is a babe, then might I not say so,
    To give full growth to that which still doth grow?

  Let me not to the marriage of true minds
  Admit impediments. Love is not love
  Which alters when it alteration finds,
  Or bends with the remover to remove:
  O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark,
  That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
  It is the star to every wandering bark,
  Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
  Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
  Within his bending sickle's compass come;
  Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
  But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
    If this be error and upon me prov'd,
    I never writ, nor no man ever lov'd.

  Accuse me thus: that I have scanted all,
  Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
  Forgot upon your dearest love to call,
  Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
  That I have frequent been with unknown minds,
  And given to time your own dear-purchas'd right;
  That I have hoisted sail to all the winds
  Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
  Book both my wilfulness and errors down,
  And on just proof surmise, accumulate;
  Bring me within the level of your frown,
  But shoot not at me in your waken'd hate;
    Since my appeal says I did strive to prove
    The constancy and virtue of your love.

  Like as, to make our appetite more keen,
  With eager compounds we our palate urge;
  As, to prevent our maladies unseen,
  We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
  Even so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness,
  To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
  And, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness
  To be diseas'd, ere that there was true needing.
  Thus policy in love, to anticipate
  The ills that were not, grew to faults assur'd,
  And brought to medicine a healthful state
  Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cur'd;
    But thence I learn and find the lesson true,
    Drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.

  What potions have I drunk of Siren tears,
  Distill'd from limbecks foul as hell within,
  Applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears,
  Still losing when I saw myself to win!
  What wretched errors hath my heart committed,
  Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
  How have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted,
  In the distraction of this madding fever!
  O benefit of ill! now I find true
  That better is, by evil still made better;
  And ruin'd love, when it is built anew,
  Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
    So I return rebuk'd to my content,
    And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.

  That you were once unkind befriends me now,
  And for that sorrow, which I then did feel,
  Needs must I under my transgression bow,
  Unless my nerves were brass or hammer'd steel.
  For if you were by my unkindness shaken,
  As I by yours, you've pass'd a hell of time;
  And I, a tyrant, have no leisure taken
  To weigh how once I suffer'd in your crime.
  O! that our night of woe might have remember'd
  My deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits,
  And soon to you, as you to me, then tender'd
  The humble salve, which wounded bosoms fits!
    But that your trespass now becomes a fee;
    Mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.

  'Tis better to be vile than vile esteem'd,
  When not to be receives reproach of being;
  And the just pleasure lost, which is so deem'd
  Not by our feeling, but by others' seeing:
  For why should others' false adulterate eyes
  Give salutation to my sportive blood?
  Or on my frailties why are frailer spies,
  Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
  No, I am that I am, and they that level
  At my abuses reckon up their own:
  I may be straight though they themselves be bevel;
  By their rank thoughts, my deeds must not be shown;
    Unless this general evil they maintain,
    All men are bad and in their badness reign.

  Thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain
  Full character'd with lasting memory,
  Which shall above that idle rank remain,
  Beyond all date; even to eternity:
  Or, at the least, so long as brain and heart
  Have faculty by nature to subsist;
  Till each to raz'd oblivion yield his part
  Of thee, thy record never can be miss'd.
  That poor retention could not so much hold,
  Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score;
  Therefore to give them from me was I bold,
  To trust those tables that receive thee more:
    To keep an adjunct to remember thee
    Were to import forgetfulness in me.

  No, Time, thou shalt not boast that I do change:
  Thy pyramids built up with newer might
  To me are nothing novel, nothing strange;
  They are but dressings of a former sight.
  Our dates are brief, and therefore we admire
  What thou dost foist upon us that is old;
  And rather make them born to our desire
  Than think that we before have heard them told.
  Thy registers and thee I both defy,
  Not wondering at the present nor the past,
  For thy records and what we see doth lie,
  Made more or less by thy continual haste.
    This I do vow and this shall ever be;
    I will be true despite thy scythe and thee.

  If my dear love were but the child of state,
  It might for Fortune's bastard be unfather'd,
  As subject to Time's love or to Time's hate,
  Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gather'd.
  No, it was builded far from accident;
  It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
  Under the blow of thralled discontent,
  Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls:
  It fears not policy, that heretic,
  Which works on leases of short-number'd hours,
  But all alone stands hugely politic,
  That it nor grows with heat, nor drowns with showers.
    To this I witness call the fools of time,
    Which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.

  Were't aught to me I bore the canopy,
  With my extern the outward honouring,
  Or laid great bases for eternity,
  Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
  Have I not seen dwellers on form and favour
  Lose all and more by paying too much rent
  For compound sweet; forgoing simple savour,
  Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
  No; let me be obsequious in thy heart,
  And take thou my oblation, poor but free,
  Which is not mix'd with seconds, knows no art,
  But mutual render, only me for thee.
    Hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul
    When most impeach'd, stands least in thy control.

  O thou, my lovely boy, who in thy power
  Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his fickle hour;
  Who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st
  Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.
  If Nature, sovereign mistress over wrack,
  As thou goest onwards, still will pluck thee back,
  She keeps thee to this purpose, that her skill
  May time disgrace and wretched minutes kill.
  Yet fear her, O thou minion of her pleasure!
  She may detain, but not still keep, her treasure:
    Her audit (though delayed) answered must be,
    And her quietus is to render thee.

  In the old age black was not counted fair,
  Or if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
  But now is black beauty's successive heir,
  And beauty slander'd with a bastard shame:
  For since each hand hath put on Nature's power,
  Fairing the foul with Art's false borrowed face,
  Sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bower,
  But is profan'd, if not lives in disgrace.
  Therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black,
  Her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem
  At such who, not born fair, no beauty lack,
  Sland'ring creation with a false esteem:
    Yet so they mourn becoming of their woe,
    That every tongue says beauty should look so.

  How oft when thou, my music, music play'st,
  Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
  With thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st
  The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
  Do I envy those jacks that nimble leap,
  To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
  Whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap,
  At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand!
  To be so tickled, they would change their state
  And situation with those dancing chips,
  O'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait,
  Making dead wood more bless'd than living lips.
    Since saucy jacks so happy are in this,
    Give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.

  The expense of spirit in a waste of shame
  Is lust in action: and till action, lust
  Is perjur'd, murderous, bloody, full of blame,
  Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
  Enjoy'd no sooner but despised straight;
  Past reason hunted; and no sooner had,
  Past reason hated, as a swallow'd bait,
  On purpose laid to make the taker mad:
  Mad in pursuit and in possession so;
  Had, having, and in quest, to have extreme;
  A bliss in proof,-- and prov'd, a very woe;
  Before, a joy propos'd; behind a dream.
    All this the world well knows; yet none knows well
    To shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.

  My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun;
  Coral is far more red, than her lips red:
  If snow be white, why then her breasts are dun;
  If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
  I have seen roses damask'd, red and white,
  But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
  And in some perfumes is there more delight
  Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
  I love to hear her speak, yet well I know
  That music hath a far more pleasing sound:
  I grant I never saw a goddess go,--
  My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground:
    And yet by heaven, I think my love as rare,
    As any she belied with false compare.

  Thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art,
  As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
  For well thou know'st to my dear doting heart
  Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
  Yet, in good faith, some say that thee behold,
  Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
  To say they err I dare not be so bold,
  Although I swear it to myself alone.
  And to be sure that is not false I swear,
  A thousand groans, but thinking on thy face,
  One on another's neck, do witness bear
  Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
    In nothing art thou black save in thy deeds,
    And thence this slander, as I think, proceeds.

  Thine eyes I love, and they, as pitying me,
  Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
  Have put on black and loving mourners be,
  Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
  And truly not the morning sun of heaven
  Better becomes the grey cheeks of the east,
  Nor that full star that ushers in the even,
  Doth half that glory to the sober west,
  As those two mourning eyes become thy face:
  O! let it then as well beseem thy heart
  To mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace,
  And suit thy pity like in every part.
    Then will I swear beauty herself is black,
    And all they foul that thy complexion lack.

  Beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan
  For that deep wound it gives my friend and me!
  Is't not enough to torture me alone,
  But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
  Me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken,
  And my next self thou harder hast engross'd:
  Of him, myself, and thee I am forsaken;
  A torment thrice three-fold thus to be cross'd:
  Prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward,
  But then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail;
  Whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard;
  Thou canst not then use rigour in my jail:
    And yet thou wilt; for I, being pent in thee,
    Perforce am thine, and all that is in me.

  So, now I have confess'd that he is thine,
  And I my self am mortgag'd to thy will,
  Myself I'll forfeit, so that other mine
  Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still:
  But thou wilt not, nor he will not be free,
  For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
  He learn'd but surety-like to write for me,
  Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
  The statute of thy beauty thou wilt take,
  Thou usurer, that putt'st forth all to use,
  And sue a friend came debtor for my sake;
  So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
    Him have I lost; thou hast both him and me:
    He pays the whole, and yet am I not free.

  Whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy 'Will,'
  And 'Will' to boot, and 'Will' in over-plus;
  More than enough am I that vex'd thee still,
  To thy sweet will making addition thus.
  Wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious,
  Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
  Shall will in others seem right gracious,
  And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
  The sea, all water, yet receives rain still,
  And in abundance addeth to his store;
  So thou, being rich in 'Will,' add to thy 'Will'
  One will of mine, to make thy large will more.
    Let no unkind 'No' fair beseechers kill;
    Think all but one, and me in that one 'Will.'

  If thy soul check thee that I come so near,
  Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy 'Will',
  And will, thy soul knows, is admitted there;
  Thus far for love, my love-suit, sweet, fulfil.
  'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love,
  Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
  In things of great receipt with ease we prove
  Among a number one is reckon'd none:
  Then in the number let me pass untold,
  Though in thy store's account I one must be;
  For nothing hold me, so it please thee hold
  That nothing me, a something sweet to thee:
    Make but my name thy love, and love that still,
    And then thou lov'st me for my name is 'Will.'

  Thou blind fool, Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,
  That they behold, and see not what they see?
  They know what beauty is, see where it lies,
  Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
  If eyes, corrupt by over-partial looks,
  Be anchor'd in the bay where all men ride,
  Why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forged hooks,
  Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
  Why should my heart think that a several plot,
  Which my heart knows the wide world's common place?
  Or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not,
  To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
    In things right true my heart and eyes have err'd,
    And to this false plague are they now transferr'd.

  When my love swears that she is made of truth,
  I do believe her though I know she lies,
  That she might think me some untutor'd youth,
  Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
  Thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young,
  Although she knows my days are past the best,
  Simply I credit her false-speaking tongue:
  On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed:
  But wherefore says she not she is unjust?
  And wherefore say not I that I am old?
  O! love's best habit is in seeming trust,
  And age in love, loves not to have years told:
    Therefore I lie with her, and she with me,
    And in our faults by lies we flatter'd be.

  O! call not me to justify the wrong
  That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
  Wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue:
  Use power with power, and slay me not by art,
  Tell me thou lov'st elsewhere; but in my sight,
  Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside:
  What need'st thou wound with cunning, when thy might
  Is more than my o'erpress'd defence can bide?
  Let me excuse thee: ah! my love well knows
  Her pretty looks have been mine enemies;
  And therefore from my face she turns my foes,
  That they elsewhere might dart their injuries:
    Yet do not so; but since I am near slain,
    Kill me outright with looks, and rid my pain.

  Be wise as thou art cruel; do not press
  My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain;
  Lest sorrow lend me words, and words express
  The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
  If I might teach thee wit, better it were,
  Though not to love, yet, love to tell me so;--
  As testy sick men, when their deaths be near,
  No news but health from their physicians know;--
  For, if I should despair, I should grow mad,
  And in my madness might speak ill of thee;
  Now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad,
  Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
    That I may not be so, nor thou belied,
    Bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.

  In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,
  For they in thee a thousand errors note;
  But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,
  Who, in despite of view, is pleased to dote.
  Nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted;
  Nor tender feeling, to base touches prone,
  Nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited
  To any sensual feast with thee alone:
  But my five wits nor my five senses can
  Dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee,
  Who leaves unsway'd the likeness of a man,
  Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be:
    Only my plague thus far I count my gain,
    That she that makes me sin awards me pain.

  Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,
  Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving:
  O! but with mine compare thou thine own state,
  And thou shalt find it merits not reproving;
  Or, if it do, not from those lips of thine,
  That have profan'd their scarlet ornaments
  And seal'd false bonds of love as oft as mine,
  Robb'd others' beds' revenues of their rents.
  Be it lawful I love thee, as thou lov'st those
  Whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee:
  Root pity in thy heart, that, when it grows,
  Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
    If thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide,
    By self-example mayst thou be denied!

  Lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch
  One of her feather'd creatures broke away,
  Sets down her babe, and makes all swift dispatch
  In pursuit of the thing she would have stay;
  Whilst her neglected child holds her in chase,
  Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
  To follow that which flies before her face,
  Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
  So runn'st thou after that which flies from thee,
  Whilst I thy babe chase thee afar behind;
  But if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me,
  And play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind;
    So will I pray that thou mayst have thy 'Will,'
    If thou turn back and my loud crying still.

  Two loves I have of comfort and despair,
  Which like two spirits do suggest me still:
  The better angel is a man right fair,
  The worser spirit a woman colour'd ill.
  To win me soon to hell, my female evil,
  Tempteth my better angel from my side,
  And would corrupt my saint to be a devil,
  Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
  And whether that my angel be turn'd fiend,
  Suspect I may, yet not directly tell;
  But being both from me, both to each friend,
  I guess one angel in another's hell:
    Yet this shall I ne'er know, but live in doubt,
    Till my bad angel fire my good one out.

  Those lips that Love's own hand did make,
  Breathed forth the sound that said 'I hate',
  To me that languish'd for her sake:
  But when she saw my woeful state,
  Straight in her heart did mercy come,
  Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
  Was us'd in giving gentle doom;
  And taught it thus anew to greet;
  'I hate' she alter'd with an end,
  That followed it as gentle day,
  Doth follow night, who like a fiend
  From heaven to hell is flown away.
    'I hate', from hate away she threw,
    And sav'd my life, saying 'not you'.

  Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
  My sinful earth these rebel powers array,
  Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
  Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
  Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
  Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
  Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
  Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
  Then soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
  And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
  Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
  Within be fed, without be rich no more:
    So shall thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
    And Death once dead, there's no more dying then.

  My love is as a fever longing still,
  For that which longer nurseth the disease;
  Feeding on that which doth preserve the ill,
  The uncertain sickly appetite to please.
  My reason, the physician to my love,
  Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
  Hath left me, and I desperate now approve
  Desire is death, which physic did except.
  Past cure I am, now Reason is past care,
  And frantic-mad with evermore unrest;
  My thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are,
  At random from the truth vainly express'd;
    For I have sworn thee fair, and thought thee bright,
    Who art as black as hell, as dark as night.

  O me! what eyes hath Love put in my head,
  Which have no correspondence with true sight;
  Or, if they have, where is my judgment fled,
  That censures falsely what they see aright?
  If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
  What means the world to say it is not so?
  If it be not, then love doth well denote
  Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no,
  How can it? O! how can Love's eye be true,
  That is so vexed with watching and with tears?
  No marvel then, though I mistake my view;
  The sun itself sees not, till heaven clears.
    O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
    Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find.

  Canst thou, O cruel! say I love thee not,
  When I against myself with thee partake?
  Do I not think on thee, when I forgot
  Am of my self, all tyrant, for thy sake?
  Who hateth thee that I do call my friend,
  On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon,
  Nay, if thou lour'st on me, do I not spend
  Revenge upon myself with present moan?
  What merit do I in my self respect,
  That is so proud thy service to despise,
  When all my best doth worship thy defect,
  Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
    But, love, hate on, for now I know thy mind;
    Those that can see thou lov'st, and I am blind.

  O! from what power hast thou this powerful might,
  With insufficiency my heart to sway?
  To make me give the lie to my true sight,
  And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
  Whence hast thou this becoming of things ill,
  That in the very refuse of thy deeds
  There is such strength and warrantise of skill,
  That, in my mind, thy worst all best exceeds?
  Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,
  The more I hear and see just cause of hate?
  O! though I love what others do abhor,
  With others thou shouldst not abhor my state:
    If thy unworthiness rais'd love in me,
    More worthy I to be belov'd of thee.

  Love is too young to know what conscience is,
  Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
  Then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss,
  Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove:
  For, thou betraying me, I do betray
  My nobler part to my gross body's treason;
  My soul doth tell my body that he may
  Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
  But rising at thy name doth point out thee,
  As his triumphant prize. Proud of this pride,
  He is contented thy poor drudge to be,
  To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
    No want of conscience hold it that I call
    Her 'love,' for whose dear love I rise and fall.

  In loving thee thou know'st I am forsworn,
  But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
  In act thy bed-vow broke, and new faith torn,
  In vowing new hate after new love bearing:
  But why of two oaths' breach do I accuse thee,
  When I break twenty? I am perjur'd most;
  For all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee,
  And all my honest faith in thee is lost:
  For I have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness,
  Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy;
  And, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness,
  Or made them swear against the thing they see;
    For I have sworn thee fair; more perjur'd I,
    To swear against the truth so foul a lie!

  Cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep:
  A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
  And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep
  In a cold valley-fountain of that ground;
  Which borrow'd from this holy fire of Love,
  A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
  And grew a seeting bath, which yet men prove
  Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
  But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,
  The boy for trial needs would touch my breast;
  I, sick withal, the help of bath desired,
  And thither hied, a sad distemper'd guest,
    But found no cure, the bath for my help lies
    Where Cupid got new fire; my mistress' eyes.

  The little Love-god lying once asleep,
  Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
  Whilst many nymphs that vow'd chaste life to keep
  Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
  The fairest votary took up that fire
  Which many legions of true hearts had warm'd;
  And so the general of hot desire
  Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarm'd.
  This brand she quenched in a cool well by,
  Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,
  Growing a bath and healthful remedy,
  For men diseas'd; but I, my mistress' thrall,
    Came there for cure and this by that I prove,
    Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.


When shall we three meet again?
    In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
When the hurlyburly's done,
    When the battle's lost and won.
That will be ere the set of sun.
Where the place?
Upon the heath.
There to meet with Macbeth.
I come, Graymalkin.
Paddock calls. Anon!
    Fair is foul, and foul is fair.
    Hover through the fog and filthy air.                
meeting a bleeding Sergeant.
What bloody man is that? He can report,
    As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
    The newest state.
This is the sergeant
    Who like a good and hardy soldier fought
    'Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend!
    Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
    As thou didst leave it.
Doubtful it stood,
    As two spent swimmers that do cling together
    And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald-
    Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
    The multiplying villainies of nature
    Do swarm upon him -from the Western Isles
    Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
    And Fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
    Show'd like a rebel's whore. But all's too weak;
    For brave Macbeth -well he deserves that name-
    Disdaining Fortune, with his brandish'd steel,
    Which smoked with bloody execution,
    Like Valor's minion carved out his passage
    Till he faced the slave,
    Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
    Till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps,
    And fix'd his head upon our battlements.
O valiant cousin! Worthy gentleman!
As whence the sun 'gins his reflection
    Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,
    So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come
    Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark.
    No sooner justice had, with valor arm'd,
    Compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
    But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
    With furbish'd arms and new supplies of men,
    Began a fresh assault.
Dismay'd not this
    Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?
Yes,
    As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
    If I say sooth, I must report they were
    As cannons overcharged with double cracks,
    So they
    Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.
    Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
    Or memorize another Golgotha,
    I cannot tell-
    But I am faint; my gashes cry for help.
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
    They smack of honor both. Go get him surgeons.
                                        
    Who comes here?
The worthy Thane of Ross.
What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look
    That seems to speak things strange.
God save the King!
Whence camest thou, worthy Thane?
From Fife, great King,
    Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
    And fan our people cold.
    Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
    Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
    The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
    Till that Bellona's bridegroom, lapp'd in proof,
    Confronted him with self-comparisons,
    Point against point rebellious, arm 'gainst arm,
    Curbing his lavish spirit; and, to conclude,
    The victory fell on us.
Great happiness!
That now
    Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition;
    Nor would we deign him burial of his men
    Till he disbursed, at Saint Colme's Inch,
    Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
    Our bosom interest. Go pronounce his present death,
    And with his former title greet Macbeth.
I'll see it done.
What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.
                                                         
Where hast thou been, sister?
Killing swine.
Sister, where thou?
A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap,
    And mounch'd, and mounch'd, and mounch'd. "Give me," quoth I.
    "Aroint thee, witch!" the rump-fed ronyon cries.
    Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger;
    But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
    And, like a rat without a tail,
    I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.
I'll give thee a wind.
Thou'rt kind.
And I another.
I myself have all the other,
    And the very ports they blow,
    All the quarters that they know
    I' the shipman's card.
    I will drain him dry as hay:
    Sleep shall neither night nor day
    Hang upon his penthouse lid;
    He shall live a man forbid.
    Weary se'nnights nine times nine
    Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine;
    Though his bark cannot be lost,
    Yet it shall be tempest-toss'd.
    Look what I have.
Show me, show me.
Here I have a pilot's thumb,
    Wreck'd as homeward he did come.               
A drum, a drum!
    Macbeth doth come.
The weird sisters, hand in hand,
    Posters of the sea and land,
    Thus do go about, about,
    Thrice to thine, and thrice to mine,
    And thrice again, to make up nine.
    Peace! The charm's wound up.
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
How far is't call'd to Forres? What are these
    So wither'd and so wild in their attire,
    That look not like the inhabitants o' the earth,
    And yet are on't? Live you? or are you aught
    That man may question? You seem to understand me,
    By each at once her choppy finger laying
    Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
    And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
    That you are so.
Speak, if you can. What are you?
All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be King hereafter!
Good sir, why do you start, and seem to fear
    Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,
    Are ye fantastical or that indeed
    Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner
    You greet with present grace and great prediction
    Of noble having and of royal hope,
    That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
    If you can look into the seeds of time,
    And say which grain will grow and which will not,
    Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
    Your favors nor your hate.
Hail!
Hail!
Hail!
Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.
Not so happy, yet much happier.
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.
    So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more.
    By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Glamis;
    But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives,
    A prosperous gentleman; and to be King
    Stands not within the prospect of belief,
    No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
    You owe this strange intelligence, or why
    Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
    With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.
The earth hath bubbles as the water has,
    And these are of them. Whither are they vanish'd?
Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted
    As breath into the wind. Would they had stay'd!
Were such things here as we do speak about?
    Or have we eaten on the insane root
    That takes the reason prisoner?
Your children shall be kings.
You shall be King.
And Thane of Cawdor too. Went it not so?
To the selfsame tune and words. Who's here?
The King hath happily received, Macbeth,
    The news of thy success; and when he reads
    Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight,
    His wonders and his praises do contend
    Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that,
    In viewing o'er the rest o' the selfsame day,
    He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
    Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
    Strange images of death. As thick as hail
    Came post with post, and every one did bear
    Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense,
    And pour'd them down before him.
We are sent
    To give thee, from our royal master, thanks;
    Only to herald thee into his sight,
    Not pay thee.
And for an earnest of a greater honor,
    He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor.
    In which addition, hail, most worthy Thane,
    For it is thine.
What, can the devil speak true?
The Thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me
    In borrow'd robes?
Who was the Thane lives yet,
    But under heavy judgement bears that life
    Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined
    With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
    With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
    He labor'd in his country's wreck, I know not;
    But treasons capital, confess'd and proved,
    Have overthrown him.
 Glamis, and Thane of Cawdor!
    The greatest is behind.  Thanks for your
      pains.
     Do you not hope your children shall be
kings,
    When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
    Promised no less to them?
 That, trusted home,
    Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
    Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But 'tis strange;
    And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
    The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
    Win us with honest trifles, to betray's
    In deepest consequence-
    Cousins, a word, I pray you.
 Two truths are told,
    Of the imperial theme-I thank you, gentlemen.
     This supernatural soliciting
    Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill,
    Why hath it given me earnest of success,
    Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.
    If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
    Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
    And make my seated heart knock at my ribs,
    Against the use of nature? Present fears
    Are less than horrible imaginings:
    My thought, whose murther yet is but fantastical,
    Shakes so my single state of man that function
    Is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is
    But what is not.
Look, how our partner's rapt.
 If chance will have me King, why, chance may
      crown me
    Without my stir.
New honors come upon him,
    Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould
    But with the aid of use.
 Come what come may,
    Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
Give me your favor; my dull brain was wrought
    With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
    Are register'd where every day I turn
    The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King.
    Think upon what hath chanced, and at more time,
    The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak
    Our free hearts each to other.
Very gladly.
Till then, enough. Come, friends.            
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
    Those in commission yet return'd?
My liege,
    They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
    With one that saw him die, who did report
    That very frankly he confess'd his treasons,
    Implored your Highness' pardon, and set forth
    A deep repentance. Nothing in his life
    Became him like the leaving it; he died
    As one that had been studied in his death,
    To throw away the dearest thing he owed
    As 'twere a careless trifle.
There's no art
    To find the mind's construction in the face:
    He was a gentleman on whom I built
    An absolute trust.
    O worthiest cousin!
    The sin of my ingratitude even now
    Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before,
    That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
    To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,
    That the proportion both of thanks and payment
    Might have been mine! Only I have left to say,
    More is thy due than more than all can pay.
The service and the loyalty I owe,
    In doing it, pays itself. Your Highness' part
    Is to receive our duties, and our duties
    Are to your throne and state, children and servants,
    Which do but what they should, by doing everything
    Safe toward your love and honor.
Welcome hither.
    I have begun to plant thee, and will labor
    To make thee full of growing. Noble Banquo,
    That hast no less deserved, nor must be known
    No less to have done so; let me infold thee
    And hold thee to my heart.
There if I grow,
    The harvest is your own.
My plenteous joys,
    Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
    In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
    And you whose places are the nearest, know
    We will establish our estate upon
    Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
    The Prince of Cumberland; which honor must
    Not unaccompanied invest him only,
    But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
    On all deservers. From hence to Inverness,
    And bind us further to you.
The rest is labor, which is not used for you.
    I'll be myself the harbinger, and make joyful
    The hearing of my wife with your approach;
    So humbly take my leave.
My worthy Cawdor!
 The Prince of Cumberland! That is a step
    On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap,
    For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;
    Let not light see my black and deep desires.
    The eye wink at the hand; yet let that be
    Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.    
True, worthy Banquo! He is full so valiant,
    And in his commendations I am fed;
    It is a banquet to me. Let's after him,
    Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome.
    It is a peerless kinsman.                  
"They met me in the day of success, and I have
    learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than
    mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them
    further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished.
    Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from
the
    King, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor'; by which title,
    before, these weird sisters saluted me and referred me to the
    coming on of time with 'Hail, King that shalt be!' This have
I
    thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of
greatness,
    that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being
    ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy
heart,
    and farewell."
    Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
    What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature.
    It is too full o' the milk of human kindness
    To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great;
    Art not without ambition, but without
    The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst highly,
    That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false,
    And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou'ldst have, great Glamis,
    That which cries, "Thus thou must do, if thou have it;
    And that which rather thou dost fear to do
    Than wishest should be undone." Hie thee hither,
    That I may pour my spirits in thine ear,
    And chastise with the valor of my tongue
    All that impedes thee from the golden round,
    Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
    To have thee crown'd withal.
    What is your tidings?
The King comes here tonight.
Thou'rt mad to say it!
    Is not thy master with him? who, were't so,
    Would have inform'd for preparation.
So please you, it is true; our Thane is coming.
    One of my fellows had the speed of him,
    Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
    Than would make up his message.
Give him tending;
    He brings great news.                        
    The raven himself is hoarse
    That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
    Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
    That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here
    And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
    Of direst cruelty! Make thick my blood,
    Stop up the access and passage to remorse,
    That no compunctious visitings of nature
    Shake my fell purpose nor keep peace between
    The effect and it! Come to my woman's breasts,
    And take my milk for gall, your murthering ministers,
    Wherever in your sightless substances
    You wait on nature's mischief! Come, thick night,
    And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell
    That my keen knife see not the wound it makes
    Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
    To cry, "Hold, hold!"
    Great Glamis! Worthy Cawdor!
    Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter!
    Thy letters have transported me beyond
    This ignorant present, and I feel now
    The future in the instant.
My dearest love,
    Duncan comes here tonight.
And when goes hence?
Tomorrow, as he purposes.
O, never
    Shall sun that morrow see!
    Your face, my Thane, is as a book where men
    May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
    Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
    Your hand, your tongue; look like the innocent flower,
    But be the serpent under it. He that's coming
    Must be provided for; and you shall put
    This night's great business into my dispatch,
    Which shall to all our nights and days to come
    Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
We will speak further.
Only look up clear;
    To alter favor ever is to fear.
    Leave all the rest to me.                            
This castle hath a pleasant seat; the air
    Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
    Unto our gentle senses.
This guest of summer,
    The temple-haunting martlet, does approve
    By his loved mansionry that the heaven's breath
    Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze,
    Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
    Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle;
    Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed
    The air is delicate.
See, see, our honor'd hostess!
    The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
    Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
    How you shall bid God 'ield us for your pains,
    And thank us for your trouble.
All our service
    In every point twice done, and then done double,
    Were poor and single business to contend
    Against those honors deep and broad wherewith
    Your Majesty loads our house. For those of old,
    And the late dignities heap'd up to them,
    We rest your hermits.
Where's the Thane of Cawdor?
    We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose
    To be his purveyor; but he rides well,
    And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him
    To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
    We are your guest tonight.
Your servants ever
    Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs, in compt,
    To make their audit at your Highness' pleasure,
    Still to return your own.
Give me your hand;
    Conduct me to mine host. We love him highly,
    And shall continue our graces towards him.
    By your leave, hostess.                              
pass over
the stage.  Then enter Macbeth.
If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well
    It were done quickly. If the assassination
    Could trammel up the consequence, and catch,
    With his surcease, success; that but this blow
    Might be the be-all and the end-all -here,
    But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
    We'ld jump the life to come. But in these cases
    We still have judgement here, that we but teach
    Bloody instructions, which being taught return
    To plague the inventor. This even-handed justice
    Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice
    To our own lips. He's here in double trust:
    First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
    Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
    Who should against his murtherer shut the door,
    Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
    Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
    So clear in his great office, that his virtues
    Will plead like angels trumpet-tongued against
    The deep damnation of his taking-off,
    And pity, like a naked new-born babe
    Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubin horsed
    Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
    Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
    That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
    To prick the sides of my intent, but only
    Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself
    And falls on the other.
    How now, what news?
He has almost supp'd. Why have you left the
chamber?
Hath he ask'd for me?
Know you not he has?
We will proceed no further in this business:
    He hath honor'd me of late, and I have bought
    Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
    Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
    Not cast aside so soon.
Was the hope drunk
    Wherein you dress'd yourself? Hath it slept since?
    And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
    At what it did so freely? From this time
    Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
    As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
    Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life
    And live a coward in thine own esteem,
    Letting "I dare not" wait upon "I would"
    Like the poor cat i' the adage?
Prithee, peace!
    I dare do all that may become a man;
    Who dares do more is none.
What beast wast then
    That made you break this enterprise to me?
    When you durst do it, then you were a man,
    And, to be more than what you were, you would
    Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
    Did then adhere, and yet you would make both.
    They have made themselves, and that their fitness now
    Does unmake you. I have given suck and know
    How tender 'tis to love the babe that milks me-
    I would, while it was smiling in my face,
    Have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums
    And dash'd the brains out had I so sworn as you
    Have done to this.
If we should fail?
We fail?
    But screw your courage to the sticking-place
    And we'll not fail. When Duncan is asleep-
    Whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey
    Soundly invite him- his two chamberlains
    Will I with wine and wassail so convince
    That memory, the warder of the brain,
    Shall be a fume and the receipt of reason
    A limbeck only. When in swinish sleep
    Their drenched natures lie as in a death,
    What cannot you and I perform upon
    The unguarded Duncan? What not put upon
    His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
    Of our great quell?
Bring forth men-children only,
    For thy undaunted mettle should compose
    Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
    When we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two
    Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
    That they have done't?
Who dares receive it other,
    As we shall make our griefs and clamor roar
    Upon his death?
I am settled and bend up
    Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
    Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
    False face must hide what the false heart doth know.
                                                         
How goes the night, boy?
The moon is down; I have not heard the clock.
And she goes down at twelve.
I take't 'tis later, sir.
Hold, take my sword. There's husbandry in heaven,
    Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
    A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
    And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,
    Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature
    Gives way to in repose!
    Give me my sword.
    Who's there?
A friend.
What, sir, not yet at rest? The King's abed.
    He hath been in unusual pleasure and
    Sent forth great largess to your offices.
    This diamond he greets your wife withal,
    By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
    In measureless content.
Being unprepared,
    Our will became the servant to defect,
    Which else should free have wrought.
All's well.
    I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:
    To you they have show'd some truth.
I think not of them;
    Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
    We would spend it in some words upon that business,
    If you would grant the time.
At your kind'st leisure.
If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,
    It shall make honor for you.
So I lose none
    In seeking to augment it, but still keep
    My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
    I shall be counsel'd.
Good repose the while.
Thanks, sir, the like to you.
                                     
Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
    She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed. 
    Is this a dagger which I see before me,
    The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
    I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
    Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
    To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but
    A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
    Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
    I see thee yet, in form as palpable
    As this which now I draw.
    Thou marshal'st me the way that I was going,
    And such an instrument I was to use.
    Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses,
    Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still,
    And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood,
    Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
    It is the bloody business which informs
    Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one half-world
    Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
    The curtain'd sleep; witchcraft celebrates
    Pale Hecate's offerings; and wither'd Murther,
    Alarum'd by his sentinel, the wolf,
    Whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
    With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design
    Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,
    Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
    Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
    And take the present horror from the time,
    Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives;
    Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
                                                   
    I go, and it is done; the bell invites me.
    Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
    That summons thee to heaven, or to hell.               
That which hath made them drunk hath made me
bold;
    What hath quench'd them hath given me fire. Hark! Peace!
    It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman,
    Which gives the stern'st good night. He is about it:
    The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
    Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugg'd their
possets
    That death and nature do contend about them,
    Whether they live or die.
 Who's there? what, ho!
Alack, I am afraid they have awaked
    And 'tis not done. The attempt and not the deed
    Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready;
    He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled
    My father as he slept, I had done't.
    My husband!
I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
    Did not you speak?
When?
Now.
As I descended?
Ay.
Hark!
    Who lies i' the second chamber?
Donalbain.
This is a sorry sight.           
A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.
There's one did laugh in 's sleep, and one cried,
      "Murther!"
    That they did wake each other. I stood and heard them,
    But they did say their prayers and address'd them
    Again to sleep.
There are two lodged together.
One cried, "God bless us!" and "Amen" the other,
    As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.
    Listening their fear, I could not say "Amen,"
    When they did say, "God bless us!"
Consider it not so deeply.
But wherefore could not I pronounce "Amen"?
    I had most need of blessing, and "Amen"
    Stuck in my throat.
These deeds must not be thought
    After these ways; so, it will make us mad.
I heard a voice cry, "Sleep no more!
    Macbeth does murther sleep" -the innocent sleep,
    Sleep that knits up the ravel'd sleave of care,
    The death of each day's life, sore labor's bath,
    Balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
    Chief nourisher in life's feast-
What do you mean?
Still it cried, "Sleep no more!" to all the house;
    "Glamis hath murther'd sleep, and therefore Cawdor
    Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more."
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy Thane,
    You do unbend your noble strength, to think
    So brainsickly of things. Go, get some water
    And wash this filthy witness from your hand.
    Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
    They must lie there. Go carry them, and smear
    The sleepy grooms with blood.
I'll go no more.
    I am afraid to think what I have done;
    Look on't again I dare not.
Infirm of purpose!
    Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
    Are but as pictures; 'tis the eye of childhood
    That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
    I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
    For it must seem their guilt.         
Whence is that knocking?
    How is't with me, when every noise appals me?
    What hands are here? Ha, they pluck out mine eyes!
    Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood
    Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
    The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
    Making the green one red.
                   Re-enter Lady Macbeth.
My hands are of your color, but I shame
    To wear a heart so white.  I hear knocking
    At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber.
    A little water clears us of this deed.
    How easy is it then! Your constancy
    Hath left you unattended.  Hark, more
knocking.
    Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us
    And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
    So poorly in your thoughts.
To know my deed, 'twere best not know myself.
                                             
    Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst!
                                                         
Here's a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of Hell
    Gate, he should have old turning the key. 
    Knock, knock, knock! Who's there, i' the name of Belzebub?
Here's
    a farmer that hanged himself on th' expectation of plenty.
Come
    in time! Have napkins enow about you; here you'll sweat
for't.
     Knock, knock! Who's there, in th' other
    devil's name? Faith, here's an equivocator that could swear
in
    both the scales against either scale, who committed treason
    enough for God's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven. O,
    come in, equivocator.  Knock, knock, knock!
    Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither, for
    stealing out of a French hose. Come in, tailor; here you may
    roast your goose.  Knock, knock! Never at
    quiet! What are you? But this place is too cold for hell.
I'll
    devil-porter it no further. I had thought to have let in some
of
    all professions, that go the primrose way to the everlasting
    bonfire.  Anon, anon! I pray you, remember
the
    porter.
                              
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed,
    That you do lie so late?
Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second cock; and
    drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.
What three things does drink especially provoke?
Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. Lechery,
sir,
    it provokes and unprovokes: it provokes the desire, but it
takes
    away the performance. Therefore much drink may be said to be
an
    equivocator with lechery: it makes him, and it mars him; it
sets
    him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him and
disheartens
    him; makes him stand to and not stand to; in conclusion,
    equivocates him in a sleep, and giving him the lie, leaves
him.
I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
That it did, sir, i' the very throat on me; but
requited
    him for his lie, and, I think, being too strong for him,
though
    he took up my legs sometime, yet I made shift to cast him.
Is thy master stirring?
    Our knocking has awaked him; here he comes.
Good morrow, noble sir.
Good morrow, both.
Is the King stirring, worthy Thane?
Not yet.
He did command me to call timely on him;
    I have almost slipp'd the hour.
I'll bring you to him.
I know this is a joyful trouble to you,
    But yet 'tis one.
The labor we delight in physics pain.
    This is the door.
I'll make so bold to call,
    For 'tis my limited service.                           
Goes the King hence today?
He does; he did appoint so.
The night has been unruly. Where we lay,
    Our chimneys were blown down, and, as they say,
    Lamentings heard i' the air, strange screams of death,
    And prophesying with accents terrible
    Of dire combustion and confused events
    New hatch'd to the woeful time. The obscure bird
    Clamor'd the livelong night. Some say the earth
    Was feverous and did shake.
'Twas a rough night.
My young remembrance cannot parallel
    A fellow to it.
                      Re-enter Macduff.
O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart
    Cannot conceive nor name thee.
LENNOX. What's the matter?
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.
    Most sacrilegious murther hath broke ope
    The Lord's anointed temple and stole thence
    The life o' the building.
What is't you say? the life?
Mean you his Majesty?
Approach the chamber, and destroy your sight
    With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak;
    See, and then speak yourselves.
                                      
    Awake, awake!
    Ring the alarum bell. Murther and treason!
    Banquo and Donalbain! Malcolm, awake!
    Shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit,
    And look on death itself! Up, up, and see
    The great doom's image! Malcolm! Banquo!
    As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites
    To countenance this horror! Ring the bell.      
What's the business,
    That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
    The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!
O gentle lady,
    'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
    The repetition in a woman's ear
    Would murther as it fell.
    O Banquo, Banquo!
    Our royal master's murther'd.
Woe, alas!
    What, in our house?
Too cruel anywhere.
    Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself,
    And say it is not so.
          Re-enter Macbeth and Lennox, with Ross.
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
    I had lived a blessed time, for from this instant
    There's nothing serious in mortality.
    All is but toys; renown and grace is dead,
    The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
    Is left this vault to brag of.
What is amiss?
You are, and do not know't.
    The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
    Is stopped, the very source of it is stopp'd.
Your royal father's murther'd.
O, by whom?
Those of his chamber, as it seem'd, had done't.
    Their hands and faces were all badged with blood;
    So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
    Upon their pillows.
    Was to be trusted with them.
O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
    That I did kill them.
Wherefore did you so?
Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious,
    Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man.
    The expedition of my violent love
    Outrun the pauser reason. Here lay Duncan,
    His silver skin laced with his golden blood,
    And his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature
    For ruin's wasteful entrance; there, the murtherers,
    Steep'd in the colors of their trade, their daggers
    Unmannerly breech'd with gore. Who could refrain,
    That had a heart to love, and in that heart
    Courage to make 's love known?
Help me hence, ho!
Look to the lady.
 Why do we hold our tongues,
    That most may claim this argument for ours?
 What should be spoken here,
where
      our fate,
    Hid in an auger hole, may rush and seize us?
    Let's away,
    Our tears are not yet brew'd.
 Nor our strong sorrow
    Upon the foot of motion.
Look to the lady.
                                    
    And when we have our naked frailties hid,
    That suffer in exposure, let us meet
    And question this most bloody piece of work
    To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us.
    In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
    Against the undivulged pretense I fight
    Of treasonous malice.
And so do I.
So all.
Let's briefly put on manly readiness
    And meet i' the hall together.
Well contented.
                           
What will you do? Let's not consort with them.
    To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
    Which the false man does easy. I'll to England.
To Ireland, I; our separated fortune
    Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are
    There's daggers in men's smiles; the near in blood,
    The nearer bloody.
This murtherous shaft that's shot
    Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
    Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse;
    And let us not be dainty of leave-taking,
    But shift away. There's warrant in that theft
    Which steals itself when there's no mercy left.
                                                         
Threescore and ten I can remember well,
    Within the volume of which time I have seen
    Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night
    Hath trifled former knowings.
Ah, good father,
    Threaten his bloody stage. By the clock 'tis day,
    And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.
    Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame,
    That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
    When living light should kiss it?
'Tis unnatural,
    Even like the deed that's done. On Tuesday last
    A falcon towering in her pride of place
    Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.
And Duncan's horses-a thing most strange and certain-
    Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
    Turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
    Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make
    War with mankind.
'Tis said they eat each other.
They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes
    That look'd upon't.
    Here comes the good Macduff.
    How goes the world, sir, now?
Why, see you not?
Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?
Those that Macbeth hath slain.
Alas, the day!
    What good could they pretend?
They were suborn'd:
    Malcolm and Donalbain, the King's two sons,
    Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them
    Suspicion of the deed.
'Gainst nature still!
    Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up
    Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like
    The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
He is already named, and gone to Scone
    To be invested.
Where is Duncan's body?
Carried to Colmekill,
    The sacred storehouse of his predecessors
    And guardian of their bones.
Will you to Scone?
No, cousin, I'll to Fife.
Well, I will thither.
Well, may you see things well done there.
    Adieu,
    Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!
Farewell, father.
God's benison go with you and with those
    That would make good of bad and friends of foes!
                                                         
Thou hast it now: King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
    As the weird women promised, and I fear
    Thou play'dst most foully for't; yet it was said
    It should not stand in thy posterity,
    But that myself should be the root and father
    Of many kings. If there come truth from them
    (As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
    Why, by the verities on thee made good,
    May they not be my oracles as well
    And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.
      Sennet sounds. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady Macbeth
    as Queen, Lennox, Ross, Lords, Ladies, and Attendants.
Here's our chief guest.
If he had been forgotten,
    It had been as a gap in our great feast
    And all thing unbecoming.
Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
    And I'll request your presence.
Let your Highness
    Command upon me, to the which my duties
    Are with a most indissoluble tie
    Forever knit.
Ride you this afternoon?
Ay, my good lord.
We should have else desired your good advice,
    Which still hath been both grave and prosperous
    In this day's council; but we'll take tomorrow.
    Is't far you ride?
As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
    'Twixt this and supper. Go not my horse the better,
    I must become a borrower of the night
    For a dark hour or twain.
Fail not our feast.
My lord, I will not.
We hear our bloody cousins are bestow'd
    In England and in Ireland, not confessing
    Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
    With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,
    When therewithal we shall have cause of state
    Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse; adieu,
    Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?
Ay, my good lord. Our time does call upon 's.
I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,
    And so I do commend you to their backs.
    Farewell.                                     
    Let every man be master of his time
    Till seven at night; to make society
    The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
    Till supper time alone. While then, God be with you!
                        
    Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men
    Our pleasure?
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
Bring them before us.              
    To be thus is nothing,
    But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo.
    Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
    Reigns that which would be fear'd. 'Tis much he dares,
    And, to that dauntless temper of his mind,
    He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor
    Whose being I do fear; and under him
    My genius is rebuked, as it is said
    Mark Antony's was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
    When first they put the name of King upon me
    And bade them speak to him; then prophet-like
    They hail'd him father to a line of kings.
    Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown
    And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
    Thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand,
    No son of mine succeeding. If't be so,
    For Banquo's issue have I filed my mind,
    For them the gracious Duncan have I murther'd,
    Put rancors in the vessel of my peace
    Only for them, and mine eternal jewel
    Given to the common enemy of man,
    To make them kings -the seed of Banquo kings!
    Rather than so, come, Fate, into the list,
    And champion me to the utterance! Who's there?
        Re-enter Attendant, with two Murtherers.
    Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.
                                                 
    Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
It was, so please your Highness.
Well then, now
    Have you consider'd of my speeches? Know
    That it was he in the times past which held you
    So under fortune, which you thought had been
    Our innocent self? This I made good to you
    In our last conference, pass'd in probation with you:
    How you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments,
    Who wrought with them, and all things else that might
    To half a soul and to a notion crazed
    Say, "Thus did Banquo."
You made it known to us.
I did so, and went further, which is now
    Our point of second meeting. Do you find
    Your patience so predominant in your nature,
    That you can let this go? Are you so gospel'd,
    To pray for this good man and for his issue,
    Whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave
    And beggar'd yours forever?
We are men, my liege.
Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men,
    As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, curs,
    Shoughs, waterrugs, and demi-wolves are clept
    All by the name of dogs. The valued file
    Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
    The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
    According to the gift which bounteous nature
    Hath in him closed, whereby he does receive
    Particular addition, from the bill
    That writes them all alike; and so of men.
    Now if you have a station in the file,
    Not i' the worst rank of manhood, say it,
    And I will put that business in your bosoms
    Whose execution takes your enemy off,
    Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
    Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
    Which in his death were perfect.
I am one, my liege,
    Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
    Have so incensed that I am reckless what
    I do to spite the world.
And I another
    So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune,
    That I would set my life on any chance,
    To mend it or be rid on't.
Both of you
    Know Banquo was your enemy.
True, my lord.
So is he mine, and in such bloody distance
    That every minute of his being thrusts
    Against my near'st of life; and though I could
    With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
    And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
    For certain friends that are both his and mine,
    Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
    Who I myself struck down. And thence it is
    That I to your assistance do make love,
    Masking the business from the common eye
    For sundry weighty reasons.
We shall, my lord,
    Perform what you command us.
Though our lives-
Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at
most
    I will advise you where to plant yourselves,
    Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time,
    The moment on't; for't must be done tonight
    And something from the palace (always thought
    That I require a clearness); and with him-
    To leave no rubs nor botches in the work-
    Fleance his son, that keeps him company,
    Whose absence is no less material to me
    Than is his father's, must embrace the fate
    Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart;
    I'll come to you anon.
We are resolved, my lord.
I'll call upon you straight. Abide within.
                                              
    It is concluded: Banquo, thy soul's flight,
    If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.        
Is Banquo gone from court?
Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.
Say to the King I would attend his leisure
    For a few words.
Madam, I will.                                
Nought's had, all's spent,
    Where our desire is got without content.
    'Tis safer to be that which we destroy
    Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
    How now, my lord? Why do you keep alone,
    Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
    Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
    With them they think on? Things without all remedy
    Should be without regard. What's done is done.
We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it.
    She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice
    Remains in danger of her former tooth.
    But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer,
    Ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep
    In the affliction of these terrible dreams
    That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
    Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
    Than on the torture of the mind to lie
    In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave;
    After life's fitful fever he sleeps well.
    Treason has done his worst; nor steel, nor poison,
    Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing,
    Can touch him further.
Come on,
    Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks;
    Be bright and jovial among your guests tonight.
So shall I, love, and so, I pray, be you.
    Let your remembrance apply to Banquo;
    Present him eminence, both with eye and tongue:
    Unsafe the while, that we
    Must lave our honors in these flattering streams,
    And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
    Disguising what they are.
You must leave this.
O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
    Thou know'st that Banquo and his Fleance lives.
But in them nature's copy's not eterne.
There's comfort yet; they are assailable.
    Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
    His cloister'd flight, ere to black Hecate's summons
    The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums
    Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
    A deed of dreadful note.
What's to be done?
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
    Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night,
    Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day,
    And with thy bloody and invisible hand
    Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
    Which keeps me pale! Light thickens, and the crow
    Makes wing to the rooky wood;
    Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
    Whiles night's black agents to their preys do rouse.
    Thou marvel'st at my words, but hold thee still:
    Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
    So, prithee, go with me.                             
But who did bid thee join with us?
Macbeth.
He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
    Our offices and what we have to do
    To the direction just.
Then stand with us.
    The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day;
    Now spurs the lated traveler apace
    To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
    The subject of our watch.
Hark! I hear horses.
 Give us a light there, ho!
Then 'tis he; the rest
    That are within the note of expectation
    Already are i' the court.
His horses go about.
Almost a mile, but he does usually-
    So all men do -from hence to the palace gate
    Make it their walk.
A light, a light!
'Tis he.
Stand to't.
It will be rain tonight.
Let it come down.
                                          
O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
    Thou mayst revenge. O slave!          
Who did strike out the light?
Wast not the way?
There's but one down; the son is fled.
We have lost
    Best half of our affair.
Well, let's away and say how much is done.
                                                         
You know your own degrees; sit down. At first
    And last the hearty welcome.
Thanks to your Majesty.
Ourself will mingle with society
    And play the humble host.
    Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time
    We will require her welcome.
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,
    For my heart speaks they are welcome.
See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.
    Both sides are even; here I'll sit i' the midst.
    Be large in mirth; anon we'll drink a measure
    The table round.  There's blood upon
thy
      face.
'Tis Banquo's then.
'Tis better thee without than he within.
    Is he dispatch'd?
My lord, his throat is cut; that I did for him.
Thou art the best o' the cut-throats! Yet he's good
    That did the like for Fleance. If thou didst it,
    Thou art the nonpareil.
Most royal sir,
    Fleance is 'scaped.
 Then comes my fit again. I had else been
perfect,
    Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
    As broad and general as the casing air;
    But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confin'd, bound in
    To saucy doubts and fears -But Banquo's safe?
Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,
    With twenty trenched gashes on his head,
    The least a death to nature.
Thanks for that.
    There the grown serpent lies; the worm that's fled
    Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
    No teeth for the present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow
    We'll hear ourselves again.
                                                 
My royal lord,
    You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold
    That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis amaking,
    'Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home;
    From thence the sauce to meat is ceremony;
    Meeting were bare without it.
Sweet remembrancer!
    Now good digestion wait on appetite,
    And health on both!
May't please your Highness sit.
      The Ghost of Banquo enters and sits in Macbeth's place.
Here had we now our country's honor roof'd,
    Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
    Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
    Than pity for mischance!
His absence, sir,
    Lays blame upon his promise. Please't your Highness
    To grace us with your royal company?
The table's full.
Here is a place reserved, sir.
Where?
Here, my good lord. What is't that moves your Highness?
Which of you have done this?
What, my good lord?
Thou canst not say I did it; never shake
    Thy gory locks at me.
Gentlemen, rise; his Highness is not well.
Sit, worthy friends; my lord is often thus,
    And hath been from his youth. Pray you, keep seat.
    The fit is momentary; upon a thought
    He will again be well. If much you note him,
    You shall offend him and extend his passion.
    Feed, and regard him not-Are you a man?
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
    Which might appal the devil.
O proper stuff!
    This is the very painting of your fear;
    This is the air-drawn dagger which you said
    Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
    Impostors to true fear, would well become
    A woman's story at a winter's fire,
    Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!
    Why do you make such faces? When all's done,
    You look but on a stool.
Prithee, see there! Behold! Look! Lo! How say you?
    Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.
    If charnel houses and our graves must send
    Those that we bury back, our monuments
    Shall be the maws of kites.                      
What, quite unmann'd in folly?
If I stand here, I saw him.
Fie, for shame!
Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time,
    Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;
    Ay, and since too, murthers have been perform'd
    Too terrible for the ear. The time has been,
    That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
    And there an end; but now they rise again,
    With twenty mortal murthers on their crowns,
    And push us from our stools. This is more strange
    Than such a murther is.
My worthy lord,
    Your noble friends do lack you.
I do forget.
    Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
    I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
    To those that know me. Come, love and health to all;
    Then I'll sit down. Give me some wine, fill full.
    I drink to the general joy o' the whole table,
    And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss.
    Would he were here! To all and him we thirst,
    And all to all.
Our duties and the pledge.
                     Re-enter Ghost.
Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee!
    Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold;
    Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
    Which thou dost glare with.
Think of this, good peers,
    But as a thing of custom. 'Tis no other,
    Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
What man dare, I dare.
    Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
    The arm'd rhinoceros, or the Hyrcan tiger;
    Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
    Shall never tremble. Or be alive again,
    And dare me to the desert with thy sword.
    If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
    The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
    Unreal mockery, hence!                          
    Why, so, being gone,
    I am a man again. Pray you sit still.
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good
meeting,
    With most admired disorder.
Can such things be,
    And overcome us like a summer's cloud,
    Without our special wonder? You make me strange
    Even to the disposition that I owe
    When now I think you can behold such sights
    And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks
    When mine is blanch'd with fear.
What sights, my lord?
I pray you, speak not; he grows worse and worse;
    Question enrages him. At once, good night.
    Stand not upon the order of your going,
    But go at once.
Good night, and better health
    Attend his Majesty!
A kind good night to all!
                        
It will have blood; they say blood will have blood.
    Stones have been known to move and trees to speak;
    Augures and understood relations have
    By maggot pies and choughs and rooks brought forth
    The secret'st man of blood. What is the night?
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.
How say'st thou, that Macduff denies his person
    At our great bidding?
Did you send to him, sir?
I hear it by the way, but I will send.
    There's not a one of them but in his house
    I keep a servant feed. I will tomorrow,
    And betimes I will, to the weird sisters.
    More shall they speak; for now I am bent to know,
    By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good
    All causes shall give way. I am in blood
    Stepp'd in so far that, should I wade no more,
    Returning were as tedious as go o'er.
    Strange things I have in head that will to hand,
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.
Come, we'll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
    Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
    We are yet but young in deed.                       
Why, how now, Hecate? You look angerly.
Have I not reason, beldams as you are,
    Saucy and overbold? How did you dare
    To trade and traffic with Macbeth
    In riddles and affairs of death,
    And I, the mistress of your charms,
    The close contriver of all harms,
    Was never call'd to bear my part,
    Or show the glory of our art?
    And, which is worse, all you have done
    Hath been but for a wayward son,
    Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
    Loves for his own ends, not for you.
    But make amends now. Get you gone,
    And at the pit of Acheron
    Meet me i' the morning. Thither he
    Will come to know his destiny.
    Your vessels and your spells provide,
    Your charms and everything beside.
    I am for the air; this night I'll spend
    Unto a dismal and a fatal end.
    Great business must be wrought ere noon:
    Upon the corner of the moon
    There hangs a vaporous drop profound;
    I'll catch it ere it come to ground.
    And that distill'd by magic sleights
    Shall raise such artificial sprites
    As by the strength of their illusion
    Shall draw him on to his confusion.
    He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
    His hopes 'bove wisdom, grace, and fear.
    And you all know security
    Is mortals' chiefest enemy.
    Hark! I am call'd; my little spirit, see,
    Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.                
Come, let's make haste; she'll soon be back again.
                                                         
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
    Which can interpret farther; only I say
    Thing's have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan
    Was pitied of Macbeth; marry, he was dead.
    And the right valiant Banquo walk'd too late,
    Whom, you may say, if't please you, Fleance kill'd,
    For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
    Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
    It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
    How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight,
    In pious rage, the two delinquents tear
    That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
    Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too,
    For 'twould have anger'd any heart alive
    To hear the men deny't. So that, I say,
    He has borne all things well; and I do think
    That, had he Duncan's sons under his key-
    As, an't please heaven, he shall not -they should find
    What 'twere to kill a father; so should Fleance.
    But, peace! For from broad words, and 'cause he fail'd
    His presence at the tyrant's feast, I hear,
    Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
    Where he bestows himself?
The son of Duncan,
    From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth,
    Lives in the English court and is received
    Of the most pious Edward with such grace
    That the malevolence of fortune nothing
    Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
    Is gone to pray the holy King, upon his aid
    To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward;
    That by the help of these, with Him above
    To ratify the work, we may again
    Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
    Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
    Do faithful homage, and receive free honors-
    All which we pine for now. And this report
    Hath so exasperate the King that he
    Prepares for some attempt of war.
Sent he to Macduff?
He did, and with an absolute "Sir, not I,"
    The cloudy messenger turns me his back,
    And hums, as who should say, "You'll rue the time
    That clogs me with this answer."
And that well might
    Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance
    His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
    Fly to the court of England and unfold
    His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
    May soon return to this our suffering country
    Under a hand accursed!
I'll send my prayers with him.
                                                         
Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.
Thrice and once the hedge-pig whined.
Harpier cries, "'Tis time, 'tis time."
Round about the cauldron go;
    In the poison'd entrails throw.
    Toad, that under cold stone
    Days and nights has thirty-one
    Swelter'd venom sleeping got,
    Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
Fillet of a fenny snake,
    In the cauldron boil and bake;
    Eye of newt and toe of frog,
    Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
    Adder's fork and blind-worm's sting,
    Lizard's leg and howlet's wing,
    For a charm of powerful trouble,
    Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
    Witch's mummy, maw and gulf
    Of the ravin'd salt-sea shark,
    Root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark,
    Liver of blaspheming Jew,
    Gall of goat and slips of yew
    Sliver'd in the moon's eclipse,
    Nose of Turk and Tartar's lips,
    Finger of birth-strangled babe
    Ditch-deliver'd by a drab,
    Make the gruel thick and slab.
    Add thereto a tiger's chaudron,
    For the ingredients of our cauldron.
Double, double, toil and trouble;
    Fire burn and cauldron bubble.
Cool it with a baboon's blood,
    Then the charm is firm and good.
O, well done! I commend your pains,
    And everyone shall share i' the gains.
    And now about the cauldron sing,
    Like elves and fairies in a ring,
    Enchanting all that you put in.
By the pricking of my thumbs,
    Something wicked this way comes.
    Open, locks,
    Whoever knocks!
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags?
    What is't you do?
A deed without a name.
I conjure you, by that which you profess
    (Howeer you come to know it) answer me:
    Though you untie the winds and let them fight
    Against the churches, though the yesty waves
    Confound and swallow navigation up,
    Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down,
    Though castles topple on their warders' heads,
    Though palaces and pyramids do slope
    Their heads to their foundations, though the treasure
    Of nature's germaines tumble all together
    Even till destruction sicken, answer me
    To what I ask you.
Speak.
Demand.
We'll answer.
Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths,
    Or from our masters'?
Call 'em, let me see 'em.
Pour in sow's blood that hath eaten
    Her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten
    From the murtherer's gibbet throw
    Into the flame.
Come, high or low;
    Thyself and office deftly show!
Tell me, thou unknown power-
He knows thy thought:
    Hear his speech, but say thou nought.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff,
    Beware the Thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough.
                                                    
Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks;
    Thou hast harp'd my fear aright. But one word more-
He will not be commanded. Here's another,
    More potent than the first.
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!
Had I three ears, I'd hear thee.
Be bloody, bold, and resolute: laugh to
scorn
    The power of man, for none of woman born
    Shall harm Macbeth.                             
Then live, Macduff. What need I fear of thee?
    But yet I'll make assurance double sure,
    And take a bond of fate: thou shalt not live,
    That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
    And sleep in spite of thunder.
    What is this,
    That rises like the issue of a king,
    And wears upon his baby brow the round
    And top of sovereignty?
Listen, but speak not to't.
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
    Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are.
    Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until
    Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill
    Shall come against him.                            
That will never be.
    Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
    Unfix his earth-bound root? Sweet bodements, good!
    Rebellion's head, rise never till the Wood
    Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth
    Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
    To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart
    Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art
    Can tell so much, shall Banquo's issue ever
    Reign in this kingdom?
Seek to know no more.
I will be satisfied! Deny me this,
    And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.
    Why sinks that cauldron, and what noise is this?
                                      
Show!
Show!
Show!
Show his eyes, and grieve his heart;
    Come like shadows, so depart!
Thou are too like the spirit of Banquo; down!
    Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair,
    Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
    A third is like the former. Filthy hags!
    Why do you show me this? A fourth! Start, eyes!
    What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?
    Another yet! A seventh! I'll see no more!
    And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass
    Which shows me many more; and some I see
    That twofold balls and treble sceptres carry.
    Horrible sight! Now I see 'tis true;
    For the blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles upon me,
    And points at them for his. What, is this so?
Ay, sir, all this is so. But why
    Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
    Come,sisters, cheer we up his sprites,
    And show the best of our delights.
    I'll charm the air to give a sound,
    While you perform your antic round,
    That this great King may kindly say
    Our duties did his welcome pay.
Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
    Stand ay accursed in the calendar!
    Come in, without there!
What's your Grace's will?
Saw you the weird sisters?
No, my lord.
Came they not by you?
No indeed, my lord.
Infected be the air whereon they ride,
    And damn'd all those that trust them! I did hear
    The galloping of horse. Who wast came by?
'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
    Macduff is fled to England.
Fled to England?
Ay, my good lord.
 Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits.
    The flighty purpose never is o'ertook
    Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
    The very firstlings of my heart shall be
    The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
    The castle of Macduff I will surprise,
    Seize upon Fife, give to the edge o' the sword
    His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
    That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
    This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.
    But no more sights! -Where are these gentlemen?
    Come, bring me where they are.                       
What had he done, to make him fly the land?
You must have patience, madam.
He had none;
    Our fears do make us traitors.
You know not
    Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
Wisdom? To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
    His mansion, and his titles, in a place
    From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
    He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
    The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
    Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
    All is the fear and nothing is the love;
    As little is the wisdom, where the flight
    So runs against all reason.
My dearest coz,
    I pray you, school yourself. But for your husband,
    He is noble, wise, Judicious, and best knows
    The fits o' the season. I dare not speak much further;
    But cruel are the times when we are traitors
    And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor
    From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
    But float upon a wild and violent sea
    Each way and move. I take my leave of you;
    Shall not be long but I'll be here again.
    Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward
    To what they were before. My pretty cousin,
    Blessing upon you!
Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless.
I am so much a fool, should I stay longer,
    It would be my disgrace and your discomfort.
    I take my leave at once.                               
Sirrah, your father's dead.
    And what will you do now? How will you live?
As birds do, Mother.
What, with worms and flies?
With what I get, I mean; and so do they.
Poor bird! Thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime,
    The pitfall nor the gin.
Why should I, Mother? Poor birds they are not set for.
    My father is not dead, for all your saying.
Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for father?
Nay, how will you do for a husband?
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.
Then you'll buy 'em to sell again.
Thou speak'st with all thy wit, and yet, i'
faith,
    With wit enough for thee.
Was my father a traitor, Mother?
Ay, that he was.
What is a traitor?
Why one that swears and lies.
And be all traitors that do so?
Everyone that does so is a traitor and must be
     hanged.
And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
Everyone.
Who must hang them?
Why, the honest men.
Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars
and
    swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.
Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt
thou do
    for a father?
If he were dead, you'ld weep for him; if you would not, it
    were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father.
Poor prattler, how thou talk'st!
Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known,
    Though in your state of honor I am perfect.
    I doubt some danger does approach you nearly.
    If you will take a homely man's advice,
    Be not found here; hence, with your little ones.
    To fright you thus, methinks I am too savage;
    To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
    Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you!
    I dare abide no longer.
Whither should I fly?
    I have done no harm. But I remember now
    I am in this earthly world, where to do harm
    Is often laudable, to do good sometime
    Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas,
    Do I put up that womanly defense,
    To say I have done no harm -What are these faces?
Where is your husband?
I hope, in no place so unsanctified
    Where such as thou mayst find him.
He's a traitor.
Thou liest, thou shag-ear'd villain!
What, you egg!
                                                      
    Young fry of treachery!
He has kill'd me, Mother.
    Run away, I pray you!   
                            
                               
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
    Weep our sad bosoms empty.
Let us rather
    Hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men
    Bestride our downfall'n birthdom. Each new morn
    New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
    Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
    As if it felt with Scotland and yell'd out
    Like syllable of dolor.
What I believe, I'll wail;
    What know, believe; and what I can redress,
    As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
    What you have spoke, it may be so perchance.
    This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
    Was once thought honest. You have loved him well;
    He hath not touch'd you yet. I am young, but something
    You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom
    To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
    To appease an angry god.
I am not treacherous.
But Macbeth is.
    A good and virtuous nature may recoil
    In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon;
    That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.
    Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
    Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
    Yet grace must still look so.
I have lost my hopes.
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
    Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
    Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
    Without leave-taking? I pray you,
    Let not my jealousies be your dishonors,
    But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
    Whatever I shall think.
Bleed, bleed, poor country!
    Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
    For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy wrongs;
    The title is affeer'd. Fare thee well, lord.
    I would not be the villain that thou think'st
    For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp
    And the rich East to boot.
Be not offended;
    I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
    I think our country sinks beneath the yoke;
    It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
    Is added to her wounds. I think withal
    There would be hands uplifted in my right;
    And here from gracious England have I offer
    Of goodly thousands. But for all this,
    When I shall tread upon the tyrant's head,
    Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
    Shall have more vices than it had before,
    More suffer and more sundry ways than ever,
    By him that shall succeed.
What should he be?
It is myself I mean, in whom I know
    All the particulars of vice so grafted
    That, when they shall be open'd, black Macbeth
    Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
    Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
    With my confineless harms.
Not in the legions
    Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd
    In evils to top Macbeth.
I grant him bloody,
    Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
    Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
    That has a name. But there's no bottom, none,
    In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters,
    Your matrons, and your maids could not fill up
    The cestern of my lust, and my desire
    All continent impediments would o'erbear
    That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth
    Than such an one to reign.
Boundless intemperance
    In nature is a tyranny; it hath been
    The untimely emptying of the happy throne,
    And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
    To take upon you what is yours. You may
    Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty
    And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.
    We have willing dames enough; there cannot be
    That vulture in you to devour so many
    As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
    Finding it so inclined.
With this there grows
    In my most ill-composed affection such
    A stanchless avarice that, were I King,
    I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
    Desire his jewels and this other's house,
    And my more-having would be as a sauce
    To make me hunger more, that I should forge
    Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
    Destroying them for wealth.
This avarice
    Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root
    Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
    The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear;
    Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will
    Of your mere own. All these are portable,
    With other graces weigh'd.
But I have none. The king-becoming graces,
    As justice, verity, temperance, stableness,
    Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
    Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
    I have no relish of them, but abound
    In the division of each several crime,
    Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
    Uproar the universal peace, confound
    All unity on earth.
O Scotland, Scotland!
If such a one be fit to govern, speak.
    I am as I have spoken.
Fit to govern?
    No, not to live. O nation miserable!
    With an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd,
    When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
    Since that the truest issue of thy throne
    By his own interdiction stands accursed
    And does blaspheme his breed? Thy royal father
    Was a most sainted king; the queen that bore thee,
    Oftener upon her knees than on her feet,
    Died every day she lived. Fare thee well!
    These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself
    Have banish'd me from Scotland. O my breast,
    Thy hope ends here!
Macduff, this noble passion,
    Child of integrity, hath from my soul
    Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
    To thy good truth and honor. Devilish Macbeth
    By many of these trains hath sought to win me
    Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
    From over-credulous haste. But God above
    Deal between thee and me! For even now
    I put myself to thy direction and
    The taints and blames I laid upon myself,
    For strangers to my nature. I am yet
    Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
    Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
    At no time broke my faith, would not betray
    The devil to his fellow, and delight
    No less in truth than life. My first false speaking
    Was this upon myself. What I am truly
    Is thine and my poor country's to command.
    Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
    Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men
    Already at a point, was setting forth.
    Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness
    Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
    'Tis hard to reconcile.
Well, more anon. Comes the King forth, I pray you?
Ay, sir, there are a crew of wretched souls
    That stay his cure. Their malady convinces
    The great assay of art, but at his touch,
    Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand,
    They presently amend.
I thank you, Doctor.                    
What's the disease he means?
'Tis call'd the evil:
    A most miraculous work in this good King,
    Which often, since my here-remain in England,
    I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven,
    Himself best knows; but strangely-visited people,
    All swol'n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
    The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
    Hanging a golden stamp about their necks
    Put on with holy prayers; and 'tis spoken,
    To the succeeding royalty he leaves
    The healing benediction. With this strange virtue
    He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
    And sundry blessings hang about his throne
    That speak him full of grace.
See, who comes here?
My countryman, but yet I know him not.
My ever gentle cousin, welcome hither.
I know him now. Good God, betimes remove
    The means that makes us strangers!
Sir, amen.
Stands Scotland where it did?
Alas, poor country,
    Almost afraid to know itself! It cannot
    Be call'd our mother, but our grave. Where nothing,
    But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
    Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air,
    Are made, not mark'd; where violent sorrow seems
    A modern ecstasy. The dead man's knell
    Is there scarce ask'd for who, and good men's lives
    Expire before the flowers in their caps,
    Dying or ere they sicken.
O, relation
    Too nice, and yet too true!
What's the newest grief?
That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker;
    Each minute teems a new one.
How does my wife?
Why, well.
And all my children?
Well too.
The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace?
No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.
Be not a niggard of your speech. How goest?
When I came hither to transport the tidings,
    Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor
    Of many worthy fellows that were out,
    Which was to my belief witness'd the rather,
    For that I saw the tyrant's power afoot.
    Now is the time of help; your eye in Scotland
    Would create soldiers, make our women fight,
    To doff their dire distresses.
Be't their comfort
    We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
    Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
    An older and a better soldier none
    That Christendom gives out.
Would I could answer
    This comfort with the like! But I have words
    That would be howl'd out in the desert air,
    Where hearing should not latch them.
What concern they?
    The general cause? Or is it a fee-grief
    Due to some single breast?
No mind that's honest
    But in it shares some woe, though the main part
    Pertains to you alone.
If it be mine,
    Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.
Let not your ears despise my tongue forever,
    Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
    That ever yet they heard.
Humh! I guess at it.
Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes
    Savagely slaughter'd. To relate the manner
    Were, on the quarry of these murther'd deer,
    To add the death of you.
Merciful heaven!
    What, man! Neer pull your hat upon your brows;
    Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak
    Whispers the o'erfraught heart, and bids it break.
My children too?
Wife, children, servants, all
    That could be found.
And I must be from thence!
    My wife kill'd too?
I have said.
Be comforted.
    Let's make us medicines of our great revenge,
    To cure this deadly grief.
He has no children. All my pretty ones?
    Did you say all? O hell-kite! All?
    What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
    At one fell swoop?
Dispute it like a man.
I shall do so,
    But I must also feel it as a man.
    I cannot but remember such things were
    That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on,
    And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
    They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
    Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
    Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now!
Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
    Convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.
O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
    And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
    Cut short all intermission; front to front
    Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself;
    Within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape,
    Heaven forgive him too!
This tune goes manly.
    Come, go we to the King; our power is ready,
    Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
    Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
    Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may,
    The night is long that never finds the day.          
I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no
    truth in your report. When was it she last walked?
Since his Majesty went into the field, I have seen
her
    rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her
    closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it,
    afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this
while
    in a most fast sleep.
A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the
    benefit of sleep and do the effects of watching! In this
slumbery
    what, at any time, have you heard her say?
That, sir, which I will not report after her.
You may to me, and 'tis most meet you should.
Neither to you nor anyone, having no witness to
    confirm my speech.
    Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise, and, upon my
    life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close.
How came she by that light?
Why, it stood by her. She has light by her
     continually; 'tis her command.
You see, her eyes are open.
Ay, but their sense is shut.
What is it she does now? Look how she rubs her hands.
    washing her hands. I have known her continue in this a
quarter of
    an hour.
Yet here's a spot.
Hark, she speaks! I will set down what comes from her,
to
    satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
Out, damned spot! Out, I say! One- two -why then
'tis
    time to do't. Hell is murky. Fie, my lord, fie! A soldier,
and
    afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call
our
    power to account? Yet who would have thought the old man to
have
    had so much blood in him?
Do you mark that?
The Thane of Fife had a wife; where is she now?
What,
    will these hands neer be clean? No more o' that, my lord, no
more
    o' that. You mar all with this starting.
Go to, go to; you have known what you should not.
She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of
that.
    Heaven knows what she has known.
Here's the smell of the blood still. All the
perfumes
    of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!
What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.
I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the
    dignity of the whole body.
Well, well, well-
Pray God it be, sir.
those
    which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in
their
    beds.
Wash your hands, put on your nightgown, look not
so
    pale. I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he cannot come
out
    on's grave.
Even so?
To bed, to bed; there's knocking at the gate.
Come,
    come, come, come, give me your hand.What's done cannot be
undone.
    To bed, to bed, to bed.

Will she go now to bed?
Directly.
Foul whisperings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
    Do breed unnatural troubles; infected minds
    To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
    More needs she the divine than the physician.
    God, God, forgive us all! Look after her;
    Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
    And still keep eyes upon her. So good night.
    My mind she has mated and amazed my sight.
    I think, but dare not speak.
Good night, good doctor.
                                                         
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
    His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
    Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
    Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
    Excite the mortified man.
Near Birnam Wood
    Shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
For certain, sir, he is not; I have a file
    Of all the gentry. There is Seward's son
    And many unrough youths that even now
    Protest their first of manhood.
What does the tyrant?
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.
    Some say he's mad; others, that lesser hate him,
    Do call it valiant fury; but, for certain,
    He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause
    Within the belt of rule.
Now does he feel
    His secret murthers sticking on his hands,
    Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach;
    Those he commands move only in command,
    Nothing in love. Now does he feel his title
    Hang loose about him, like a giant's robe
    Upon a dwarfish thief.
Who then shall blame
    His pester'd senses to recoil and start,
    When all that is within him does condemn
    Itself for being there?
Well, march we on
    To give obedience where 'tis truly owed.
    Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal,
    And with him pour we, in our country's purge,
    Each drop of us.
Or so much as it needs
    To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
    Make we our march towards Birnam.      
Bring me no more reports; let them fly all!
    Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane
    I cannot taint with fear. What's the boy Malcolm?
    Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
    All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:
    "Fear not, Macbeth; no man that's born of woman
    Shall e'er have power upon thee." Then fly, false Thanes,
    And mingle with the English epicures!
    The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
    Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.
    The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
    Where got'st thou that goose look?
There is ten thousand-
Geese, villain?
Soldiers, sir.
Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
    Thou lily-liver'd boy. What soldiers, patch?
    Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine
    Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?
The English force, so please you.
Take thy face hence.                    
    Seyton-I am sick at heart,
    When I behold- Seyton, I say!- This push
    Will chair me ever or disseat me now.
    I have lived long enough. My way of life
    Is fall'n into the sear, the yellow leaf,
    And that which should accompany old age,
    As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,
    I must not look to have; but in their stead,
    Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath,
    Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare not.
    Seyton!
What's your gracious pleasure?
What news more?
All is confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.
I'll fight, 'til from my bones my flesh be hack'd.
    Give me my armor.
'Tis not needed yet.
I'll put it on.
    Send out more horses, skirr the country round,
    Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armor.
    How does your patient, doctor?
Not so sick, my lord,
    As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies,
    That keep her from her rest.
Cure her of that.
    Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
    Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
    Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
    And with some sweet oblivious antidote
    Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff
    Which weighs upon the heart?
Therein the patient
    Must minister to himself.
Throw physic to the dogs, I'll none of it.
    Come, put mine armor on; give me my staff.
    Seyton, send out. Doctor, the Thanes fly from me.
    Come, sir, dispatch. If thou couldst, doctor, cast
    The water of my land, find her disease
    And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
    I would applaud thee to the very echo,
    That should applaud again. Pull't off, I say.
    What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug
    Would scour these English hence? Hearst thou of them?
Ay, my good lord, your royal preparation
    Makes us hear something.
Bring it after me.
    I will not be afraid of death and bane
    Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.
 Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
    Profit again should hardly draw me here.             
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
    That chambers will be safe.
We doubt it nothing.
What wood is this before us?
The Wood of Birnam.
Let every soldier hew him down a bough,
    And bear't before him; thereby shall we shadow
    The numbers of our host, and make discovery
    Err in report of us.
It shall be done.
We learn no other but the confident tyrant
    Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure
    Our setting down before't.
'Tis his main hope;
    For where there is advantage to be given,
    Both more and less have given him the revolt,
    And none serve with him but constrained things
    Whose hearts are absent too.
Let our just censures
    Attend the true event, and put we on
    Industrious soldiership.
The time approaches
    That will with due decision make us know
    What we shall say we have and what we owe.
    Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
    But certain issue strokes must arbitrate.
    Towards which advance the war.
                                                
Hang out our banners on the outward walls;
    The cry is still, "They come!" Our castle's strength
    Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie
    Till famine and the ague eat them up.
    Were they not forced with those that should be ours,
    We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
    And beat them backward home.
                                          
    What is that noise?
It is the cry of women, my good lord.     
I have almost forgot the taste of fears:
    The time has been, my senses would have cool'd
    To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
    Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
    As life were in't. I have supp'd full with horrors;
    Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
    Cannot once start me.
                  Re-enter Seyton.
     Wherefore was that cry?
The Queen, my lord, is dead.
She should have died hereafter;
    There would have been a time for such a word.
    Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow
    Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
    To the last syllable of recorded time;
    And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
    The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
    Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
    That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
    And then is heard no more. It is a tale
    Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
    Signifying nothing.
    Thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.
Gracious my lord,
    I should report that which I say I saw,
    But know not how to do it.
Well, say, sir.
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
    I look'd toward Birnam, and anon, methought,
    The Wood began to move.
Liar and slave!
Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so.
    Within this three mile may you see it coming;
    I say, a moving grove.
If thou speak'st false,
    Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive,
    Till famine cling thee; if thy speech be sooth,
    I care not if thou dost for me as much.
    I pull in resolution and begin
    To doubt the equivocation of the fiend
    That lies like truth. "Fear not, till Birnam Wood
    Do come to Dunsinane," and now a wood
    Comes toward Dunsinane. Arm, arm, and out!
    If this which he avouches does appear,
    There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
    I 'gin to be aweary of the sun
    And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.
    Ring the alarum bell! Blow, wind! Come, wrack!
    At least we'll die with harness on our back.         
Now near enough; your leavy screens throw down,
    And show like those you are. You, worthy uncle,
    Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
    Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we
    Shall take upon 's what else remains to do,
    According to our order.
Fare you well.
    Do we but find the tyrant's power tonight,
    Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
Make all our trumpets speak, give them all breath,
    Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
                                                         
They have tied me to a stake; I cannot fly,
    But bear-like I must fight the course. What's he
    That was not born of woman? Such a one
    Am I to fear, or none.
What is thy name?
Thou'lt be afraid to hear it.
No, though thou call'st thyself a hotter name
    Than any is in hell.
My name's Macbeth.
The devil himself could not pronounce a title
    More hateful to mine ear.
No, nor more fearful.
Thou liest, abhorred tyrant; with my sword
    I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.
Thou wast born of woman.
    But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
    Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.              
                Alarums. Enter Macduff.
That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
    If thou best slain and with no stroke of mine,
    My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.
    I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
    Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
    Or else my sword, with an unbatter'd edge,
    I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
    By this great clatter, one of greatest note
    Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune!
    And more I beg not.                         
This way, my lord; the castle's gently render'd.
    The tyrant's people on both sides do fight,
    The noble Thanes do bravely in the war,
    The day almost itself professes yours,
    And little is to do.
We have met with foes
    That strike beside us.
Enter, sir, the castle.
                                               
Why should I play the Roman fool and die
    On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes
    Do better upon them.
Turn, hell hound, turn!
Of all men else I have avoided thee.
    But get thee back, my soul is too much charged
    With blood of thine already.
I have no words.
    My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain
    Than terms can give thee out!                   
Thou losest labor.
    As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
    With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed.
    Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
    I bear a charmed life, which must not yield
    To one of woman born.
Despair thy charm,
    And let the angel whom thou still hast served
    Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb
    Untimely ripp'd.
Accursed be that tongue that tells me so,
    For it hath cow'd my better part of man!
    And be these juggling fiends no more believed
    That patter with us in a double sense,
    That keep the word of promise to our ear
    And break it to our hope. I'll not fight with thee.
Then yield thee, coward,
    And live to be the show and gaze o' the time.
    We'll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
    Painted upon a pole, and underwrit,
    "Here may you see the tyrant."
I will not yield,
    To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet,
    And to be baited with the rabble's curse.
    Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane,
    And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
    Yet I will try the last. Before my body
    I throw my warlike shield! Lay on, Macduff,
    And damn'd be him that first cries, "Hold, enough!"
                                       
I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.
Some must go off, and yet, by these I see,
    So great a day as this is cheaply bought.
Macduff is missing, and your noble son.
Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt.
    He only lived but till he was a man,
    The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd
    In the unshrinking station where he fought,
    But like a man he died.
Then he is dead?
Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
    Must not be measured by his worth, for then
    It hath no end.
Had he his hurts before?
Ay, on the front.
Why then, God's soldier be he!
    Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
    I would not wish them to a fairer death.
    And so his knell is knoll'd.
He's worth more sorrow,
    And that I'll spend for him.
He's worth no more:
    They say he parted well and paid his score,
    And so God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.
Hail, King, for so thou art. Behold where stands
    The usurper's cursed head. The time is free.
    I see thee compass'd with thy kingdom's pearl
    That speak my salutation in their minds,
    Whose voices I desire aloud with mine-
    Hail, King of Scotland!
Hail, King of Scotland!                         
We shall not spend a large expense of time
    Before we reckon with your several loves
    And make us even with you. My Thanes and kinsmen,
    Henceforth be Earls, the first that ever Scotland
    In such an honor named. What's more to do,
    Which would be planted newly with the time,
    As calling home our exiled friends abroad
    That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
    Producing forth the cruel ministers
    Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen,
    Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands
    Took off her life; this, and what needful else
    That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace
    We will perform in measure, time, and place.
    So thanks to all at once and to each one,
    Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone.
                

Two households, both alike in dignity,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossd lovers take their life;
Whose misadventurd piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents strife.
The fearful passage of their death-markd love,
And the continuance of their parents rage,
Which, but their childrens end, nought could remove,
Is now the two hours traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Gregory, on my word, well not carry coals.
No, for then we should be colliers.
I mean, if we be in choler, well draw.
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o the collar.
I strike quickly, being moved.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand: therefore, if thou
art moved, thou runnst away.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand.
I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montagues.
That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.
True, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to
the wall: therefore I will push Montagues men from the wall, and
thrust his maids to the wall.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I have fought with the
men I will be civil with the maids, I will cut off their heads.
The heads of the maids?
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads; take it in what sense
thou wilt.
They must take it in sense that feel it.
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and tis known I am a
pretty piece of flesh.
Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor John.
Draw thy tool; here comes of the house of Montagues.
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.
How? Turn thy back and run?
Fear me not.
No, marry; I fear thee!
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is disgrace to
them if they bear it.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
I do bite my thumb, sir.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Is the law of our side if I say ay?
No.
No sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my thumb, sir.
Do you quarrel, sir?
Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
But if you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.
No better.
Well, sir.
Say better; here comes one of my masters kinsmen.
Yes, better, sir.
You lie.
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy washing blow.
 
Part, fools! put up your swords, you know not what you do.
 
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee Benvolio, look upon thy death.
I do but keep the peace, put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.
What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward.
 
Clubs, bills and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not, let me go.
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,
Will they not hear? What, ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemperd weapons to the ground
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbd the quiet of our streets,
And made Veronas ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Cankerd with peace, to part your cankerd hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away:
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgement-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
 
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Here were the servants of your adversary
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them, in the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepard,
Which, as he breathd defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head, and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal, hissd him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
O where is Romeo, saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Madam, an hour before the worshippd sun
Peerd forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me,
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections by my own,
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Being one too many by my weary self,
Pursud my humour, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunnd who gladly fled from me.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh mornings dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Auroras bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
I neither know it nor can learn of him.
Have you importund him by any means?
Both by myself and many other friends;
But he, his own affections counsellor,
Is to himselfI will not say how true
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.
See, where he comes. So please you step aside;
Ill know his grievance or be much denied.
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, lets away,
 
Good morrow, cousin.
Is the day so young?
But new struck nine.
Ay me, sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeos hours?
Not having that which, having, makes them short.
In love?
Out.
Of love?
Out of her favour where I am in love.
Alas that love so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof.
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Heres much to do with hate, but more with love:
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O anything, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?
No coz, I rather weep.
Good heart, at what?
At thy good hearts oppression.
Why such is loves transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it prest
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purgd, a fire sparkling in lovers eyes;
Being vexd, a sea nourishd with lovers tears:
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.
 
Soft! I will go along:
And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here.
This is not Romeo, hes some other where.
Tell me in sadness who is that you love?
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Groan! Why, no; but sadly tell me who.
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will,
A word ill urgd to one that is so ill.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
I aimd so near when I supposd you lovd.
A right good markman, and shes fair I love.
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Well, in that hit you miss: shell not be hit
With Cupids arrow, she hath Dians wit;
And in strong proof of chastity well armd,
From loves weak childish bow she lives uncharmd.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms
Nor bide thencounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
O shes rich in beauty, only poor
That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beauty starvd with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise; wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.
Be ruld by me, forget to think of her.
O teach me how I should forget to think.
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.
Tis the way
To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair;
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who passd that passing fair?
Farewell, thou canst not teach me to forget.
Ill pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
 
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Of honourable reckoning are you both,
And pity tis you livd at odds so long.
But now my lord, what say you to my suit?
But saying oer what I have said before.
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
And too soon marrd are those so early made.
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
And she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustomd feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love, and you among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well apparelld April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reckoning none.
Come, go with me. Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there,  and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
 
Find them out whose names are written here! It is written that the
shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the
fisher with his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am sent to
find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what
names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned. In good
time!
Tut, man, one fire burns out anothers burning,
One pain is lessend by anothers anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with anothers languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
For what, I pray thee?
For your broken shin.
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is:
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whippd and tormented andGod-den, good fellow.
God gi go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Perhaps you have learned it without book.
But I pray, can you read anything you see?
Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Ye say honestly, rest you merry!
Stay, fellow; I can read.
 
_Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
The lady widow of Utruvio;
Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces;
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt;
Lucio and the lively Helena. _
A fair assembly.  Whither should they come?
Up.
Whither to supper?
To our house.
Whose house?
My masters.
Indeed I should have askd you that before.
Now Ill tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet,
and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a
cup of wine. Rest you merry.
 
At this same ancient feast of Capulets
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovst;
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
Go thither and with unattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drownd, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Neer saw her match since first the world begun.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poisd with herself in either eye:
But in that crystal scales let there be weighd
Your ladys love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
Ill go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.
 
Nurse, wheres my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! What ladybird!
God forbid! Wheres this girl? What, Juliet!
How now, who calls?
Your mother.
Madam, I am here. What is your will?
This is the matter. Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again,
I have rememberd me, thous hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughters of a pretty age.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Shes not fourteen.
Ill lay fourteen of my teeth,
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four,
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide?
A fortnight and odd days.
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she,God rest all Christian souls!
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was weand,I never shall forget it,
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall;
My lord and you were then at Mantua:
Nay, I do bear a brain. But as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug!
Shake, quoth the dovehouse: twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by throod
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before she broke her brow,
And then my husband,God be with his soul!
A was a merry man,took up the child:
Yea, quoth he, dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule? and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying, and said Ay.
To see now how a jest shall come about.
I warrant, and I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it. Wilt thou not, Jule? quoth he;
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said Ay.
Enough of this; I pray thee hold thy peace.
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leave crying, and say Ay;
And yet I warrant it had upon it brow
A bump as big as a young cockerels stone;
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.
Yea, quoth my husband, fallst upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule? it stinted, and said Ay.
And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace
Thou wast the prettiest babe that eer I nursd:
And I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Marry, that marry is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?
It is an honour that I dream not of.
An honour! Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suckd wisdom from thy teat.
Well, think of marriage now: younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief;
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
A man, young lady! Lady, such a man
As all the worldwhy hes a man of wax.
Veronas summer hath not such a flower.
Nay, hes a flower, in faith a very flower.
What say you, can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read oer the volume of young Paris face,
And find delight writ there with beautys pen.
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content;
And what obscurd in this fair volume lies,
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea; and tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in manys eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.
No less, nay bigger. Women grow by men.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris love?
Ill look to like, if looking liking move:
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady
asked for, the Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in extremity.
I must hence to wait, I beseech you follow straight.
We follow thee.
 
Juliet, the County stays.
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
 
 Torch-bearers and others.
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?
The date is out of such prolixity:
Well have no Cupid hoodwinkd with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartars painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will,
Well measure them a measure, and be gone.
Give me a torch, I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy I will bear the light.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Not I, believe me, you have dancing shoes,
With nimble soles, I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
You are a lover, borrow Cupids wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under loves heavy burden do I sink.
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous; and it pricks like thorn.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in: 
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me.
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.
A torch for me: let wantons, light of heart,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
For I am proverbd with a grandsire phrase,
Ill be a candle-holder and look on,
The game was neer so fair, and I am done.
Tut, duns the mouse, the constables own word:
If thou art dun, well draw thee from the mire
Or save your reverence love, wherein thou stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho.
Nay, thats not so.
I mean sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But tis no wit to go.
Why, may one ask?
I dreamt a dream tonight.
And so did I.
Well what was yours?
That dreamers often lie.
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Over mens noses as they lie asleep:
Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners legs;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Her traces, of the smallest spiders web;
The collars, of the moonshines watery beams;
Her whip of crickets bone; the lash, of film;
Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Prickd from the lazy finger of a maid:
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o mind the fairies coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers brains, and then they dream of love;
Oer courtiers knees, that dream on curtsies straight;
Oer lawyers fingers, who straight dream on fees;
Oer ladies lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops oer a courtiers nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pigs tail,
Tickling a parsons nose as a lies asleep,
Then dreams he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth oer a soldiers neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscados, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes;
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night;
And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which, once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them, and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she,
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace,
Thou talkst of nothing.
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being angerd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves:
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
I fear too early: for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this nights revels; and expire the term
Of a despised life, closd in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my suit. On, lusty gentlemen!
Strike, drum.
 
 Musicians waiting. Enter Servants.
Wheres Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
He shift a trencher! He scrape a trencher!
When good manners shall lie all in one or two mens hands, and they
unwashd too, tis a foul thing.
Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the
plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane; and as thou loves me,
let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony and Potpan!
Ay, boy, ready.
You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the
great chamber.
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be brisk awhile, and
the longer liver take all.
 
Welcome, gentlemen, ladies that have their toes
Unplagud with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She Ill swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor, and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair ladys ear,
Such as would please; tis gone, tis gone, tis gone,
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall, give room! And foot it, girls.
More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah sirrah, this unlookd-for sport comes well.
Nay sit, nay sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days;
How long ist now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?
Byr Lady, thirty years.
What, man, tis not so much, tis not so much:
Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years; and then we maskd.

Tis more, tis more, his son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.
What lady is that, which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?
I know not, sir.
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiops ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady oer her fellows shows.
The measure done, Ill watch her place of stand,
And touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
For I neer saw true beauty till this night.
This by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What, dares the slave
Come hither, coverd with an antic face,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Why how now, kinsman!
Wherefore storm you so?
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Young Romeo, is it?
Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,
A bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governd youth.
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient, take no note of him,
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
It fits when such a villain is a guest:
Ill not endure him.
He shall be endurd.
What, goodman boy! I say he shall, go to;
Am I the master here, or you? Go to.
Youll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
Youll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop, youll be the man!
Why, uncle, tis a shame.
Go to, go to!
You are a saucy boy. Ist so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what.
You must contrary me! Marry, tis time.
Well said, my hearts!You are a princox; go:
Be quiet, orMore light, more light!For shame!
Ill make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts.
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.
 
 If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this,
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers kiss.
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do:
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers sake.
Then move not while my prayers effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purgd.

Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urgd!
Give me my sin again.
You kiss by the book.
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
What is her mother?
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursd her daughter that you talkd withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foes debt.
Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone,
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it een so? Why then, I thank you all;
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, lets to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late,
Ill to my rest.
 
Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Whats he that now is going out of door?
Marry, that I think be young Petruchio.
Whats he that follows here, that would not dance?
I know not.
Go ask his name. If he be married,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.
Whats this? Whats this?
A rhyme I learnd even now
Of one I dancd withal.
Anon, anon!
Come lets away, the strangers all are gone.
 
Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groand for and would die,
With tender Juliet matchd, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is belovd, and loves again,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
But to his foe supposd he must complain,
And she steal loves sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new beloved anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
 
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
 
Romeo! My cousin Romeo! Romeo!
He is wise,
And on my life hath stoln him home to bed.
He ran this way, and leapd this orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.
Nay, Ill conjure too.
Romeo! Humours! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh,
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but Ah me! Pronounce but Love and dove;
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua lovd the beggar-maid.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosalines bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
This cannot anger him. Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress circle,
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it, and conjurd it down;
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest, and, in his mistress name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love, and best befits the dark.
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
O Romeo, that she were, O that she were
An open-arse and thou a poperin pear!
Romeo, good night. Ill to my truckle-bed.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Come, shall we go?
Go then; for tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
 
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
 Juliet appears above at a window.
But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun!
Arise fair sun and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses, I will answer it.
I am too bold, tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek.
Ay me.
She speaks.
O speak again bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being oer my head,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name.
Or if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And Ill no longer be a Capulet.
 Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Whats Montague? It is nor hand nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O be some other name.
Whats in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo calld,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.
I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and Ill be new baptisd;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
What man art thou that, thus bescreend in night
So stumblest on my counsel?
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongues utterance, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
How camst thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
With loves light wings did I oerperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt:
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
I have nights cloak to hide me from their eyes,
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
By whose direction foundst thou out this place?
By love, that first did prompt me to enquire;
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet wert thou as far
As that vast shore washd with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say Ay,
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swearst,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers perjuries,
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
Ill frown and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond;
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light:
But trust me, gentleman, Ill prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheardst, ere I was ware,
My true-love passion; therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops,
O swear not by the moon, thinconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
What shall I swear by?
Do not swear at all.
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And Ill believe thee.
If my hearts dear love,
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
It is too rash, too unadvisd, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say It lightens. Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summers ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.
O wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Thexchange of thy loves faithful vow for mine.
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
And yet I would it were to give again.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have;
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.

Anon, good Nurse!Sweet Montague be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.
 
O blessed, blessed night. I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that Ill procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot Ill lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
 Madam.
I come, anon. But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee,
 Madam.
By and by I come
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.
So thrive my soul,
A thousand times good night.
 
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.
 
 Re-enter Juliet, above.
Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconers voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again.
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of my Romeos name.
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears.
Romeo.
My nyas?
What oclock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?
By the hour of nine.
I will not fail. Tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.
And Ill still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.
Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther than a wantons bird,
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
I would I were thy bird.
Sweet, so would I:
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet sorrow
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
 
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest.
The grey-eyd morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light;
And darkness fleckled like a drunkard reels
From forth days pathway, made by Titans wheels
Hence will I to my ghostly Sires cell,
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
 
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer, and nights dank dew to dry,
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth thats natures mother, is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb:
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find.
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, straind from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice being misapplied,
Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence, and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs,grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Good morrow, father.
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemperd head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old mans eye,
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuffd brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uprousd with some distemperature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.
God pardon sin. Wast thou with Rosaline?
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
I have forgot that name, and that names woe.
Thats my good son. But where hast thou been then?
Ill tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
Thats by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessed man; for lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Then plainly know my hearts dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combind, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
We met, we wood, and made exchange of vow,
Ill tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.
Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young mens love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ring in mine ancient ears.
Lo here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washd off yet.
If ere thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline,
And art thou changd? Pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when theres no strength in men.
Thou chiddst me oft for loving Rosaline.
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
And badst me bury love.
Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.
I pray thee chide me not, her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come young waverer, come go with me,
In one respect Ill thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your households rancour to pure love.
O let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.
 
Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home tonight?
Not to his fathers; I spoke with his man.
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline, torments him so
that he will sure run mad.
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, hath sent a letter to his fathers
house.
A challenge, on my life.
Romeo will answer it.
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Nay, he will answer the letters master, how he dares, being dared.
Alas poor Romeo, he is already dead, stabbed with a white wenchs black
eye; run through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart
cleft with the blind bow-boys butt-shaft. And is he a man to encounter
Tybalt?
Why, what is Tybalt?
More than Prince of cats. O, hes the courageous captain of
compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance,
and proportion. He rests his minim rest, one, two, and the third in
your bosom: the very butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist;
a gentleman of the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah,
the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hay.
The what?
The pox of such antic lisping, affecting phantasies; these new tuners
of accent. By Jesu, a very good blade, a very tall man, a very good
whore. Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should
be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers,
these pardon-mes, who stand so much on the new form that they cannot
sit at ease on the old bench? O their bones, their bones!
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo!
Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art thou
fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura, to
his lady, was but a kitchen wench,marry, she had a better love to
berhyme her: Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gypsy; Helen and Hero hildings
and harlots; Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Romeo, bonjour! Theres a French salutation to your French slop. You
gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
The slip sir, the slip; can you not conceive?
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as
mine a man may strain courtesy.
Thats as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow
in the hams.
Meaning, to curtsy.
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
A most courteous exposition.
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Pink for flower.
Right.
Why, then is my pump well flowered.
Sure wit, follow me this jest now, till thou hast worn out thy pump,
that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the
wearing, solely singular.
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.
Swits and spurs, swits and spurs; or Ill cry a match.
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done. For thou hast
more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits, than I am sure, I have in my
whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
Thou wast never with me for anything, when thou wast not there for the
goose.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Nay, good goose, bite not.
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting, it is a most sharp sauce.
And is it not then well served in to a sweet goose?
O heres a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an
ell broad.
I stretch it out for that word broad, which added to the goose, proves
thee far and wide a broad goose.
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art thou
sociable, now art thou Romeo; not art thou what thou art, by art as
well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a great natural,
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
Stop there, stop there.
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short, for I was come to the
whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy the argument no
longer.
Heres goodly gear!
A sail, a sail!
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.
Peter!
Anon.
My fan, Peter.
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fans the fairer face.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Is it good-den?
Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the
prick of noon.
Out upon you! What a man are you?
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
By my troth, it is well said; for himself to mar, quoth a? Gentlemen,
can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?
I can tell you: but young Romeo will be older when you have found him
than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for
fault of a worse.
You say well.
Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, ifaith; wisely, wisely.
If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
She will endite him to some supper.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
What hast thou found?
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something
stale and hoar ere it be spent.

    An old hare hoar,
    And an old hare hoar,
  Is very good meat in Lent;
    But a hare that is hoar
    Is too much for a score
  When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your fathers? Well to dinner thither.
I will follow you.
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell, lady, lady, lady.
 
I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his
ropery?
A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak
more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
And a speak anything against me, Ill take him down, and a were lustier
than he is, and twenty such Jacks. And if I cannot, Ill find those
that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none of
his skains-mates.And thou must stand by too and suffer every knave to
use me at his pleasure!
I saw no man use you at his pleasure; if I had, my weapon should
quickly have been out. I warrant you, I dare draw as soon as another
man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my side.
Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy
knave. Pray you, sir, a word: and as I told you, my young lady bid me
enquire you out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself. But first
let me tell ye, if ye should lead her in a fools paradise, as they
say, it were a very gross kind of behaviour, as they say; for the
gentlewoman is young. And therefore, if you should deal double with
her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and
very weak dealing.
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto
thee,
Good heart, and ifaith I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will
be a joyful woman.
What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a
gentlemanlike offer.
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence cell
Be shrivd and married. Here is for thy pains.
No truly, sir; not a penny.
Go to; I say you shall.
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
And stay, good Nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee,
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell, be trusty, and Ill quit thy pains;
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.
Now God in heaven bless thee. Hark you, sir.
What sayst thou, my dear Nurse?
Is your man secret? Did you neer hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
I warrant thee my mans as true as steel.
Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord! When twas a
little prating thing,O, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that
would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief see a
toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes, and tell her that
Paris is the properer man, but Ill warrant you, when I say so, she
looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and
Romeo begin both with a letter?
Ay, Nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Ah, mocker! Thats the dogs name. R is for theno, I know it begins
with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it,
of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
Commend me to thy lady.
Ay, a thousand times. Peter!
 
Anon.
Before and apace.
 
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse,
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. Thats not so.
O, she is lame. Loves heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the suns beams,
Driving back shadows over lowering hills:
Therefore do nimble-piniond doves draw love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this days journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Shed be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
O God, she comes. O honey Nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Peter, stay at the gate.
 
Now, good sweet Nurse,O Lord, why lookst thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou shamst the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
I am aweary, give me leave awhile;
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I had!
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
Nay come, I pray thee speak; good, good Nurse, speak.
Jesu, what haste? Can you not stay a while? Do you not see that I am
out of breath?
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that;
Say either, and Ill stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied, ist good or bad?
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to choose a man.
Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than any mans, yet his
leg excels all mens, and for a hand and a foot, and a body, though
they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. He is not the
flower of courtesy, but Ill warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench, serve God. What, have you dined at home?
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o tother side,O my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jauncing up and down.
Ifaith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Your love says like an honest gentleman,
And a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome,
And I warrant a virtuous,Where is your mother?
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest.
Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?
O Gods lady dear,
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Heres such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?
I have.
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
Theyll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a birds nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. Ill to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.
 
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.
Amen, amen, but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.
These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph die; like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness,
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will neer wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover may bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heapd like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich musics tongue
Unfold the imagind happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Conceit more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess,
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one.
 
I pray thee, good Mercutio, lets retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
For now these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the confines of
a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table, and says God send me no
need of thee! and by the operation of the second cup draws him on the
drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Am I like such a fellow?
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy; and as
soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
And what to?
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would
kill the other. Thou? Why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a
hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel
with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou
hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy
head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast
quarrelled with a man for coughing in the street, because he hath
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall
out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? with
another for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
tutor me from quarrelling!
And I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee
simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
The fee simple! O simple!
By my head, here comes the Capulets.
By my heel, I care not.
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good-den: a word with one of you.
And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something; make it a
word and a blow.
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, and you will give me
occasion.
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? And thou make minstrels of
us, look to hear nothing but discords. Heres my fiddlestick, heres
that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.
Mens eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no mans pleasure, I.
Well, peace be with you, sir, here comes my man.
But Ill be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, hell be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: Thou art a villain.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou knowst me not.
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw.
I do protest I never injurd thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
 Alla stoccata carries it away.
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?
What wouldst thou have with me?
Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives; that I mean to
make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest
of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears?
Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.
 I am for you.
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Come, sir, your passado.
 
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage,
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
 
I am hurt.
A plague o both your houses. I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?
What, art thou hurt?
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, tis enough.
Where is my page? Go villain, fetch a surgeon.
 
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.
No, tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door, but tis
enough, twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a
grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o both
your houses. Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to
death. A braggart, a rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
arithmetic!Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your
arm.
I thought all for the best.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o both your houses.
They have made worms meat of me.
I have it, and soundly too. Your houses!
 
This gentleman, the Princes near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation staind
With Tybalts slander,Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin. O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper softend valours steel.
 Re-enter Benvolio.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutios dead,
That gallant spirit hath aspird the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
This days black fate on mo days doth depend;
This but begins the woe others must end.
 Re-enter Tybalt.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Again in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Away to heaven respective lenity,
And fire-eyd fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again
That late thou gavst me, for Mercutios soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Thou wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.
This shall determine that.
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazd. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
O, I am fortunes fool!
Why dost thou stay?
 
Which way ran he that killd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
There lies that Tybalt.
Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Princes name obey.
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
O noble Prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brothers child!
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spilld
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin.
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeos hand did slay;
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urgd withal
Your high displeasure. All this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowd
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutios breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
Hold, friends! Friends, part! and swifter than his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertaind revenge,
And tot they go like lightning; for, ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain;
And as he fell did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutios friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.
And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an interest in your hates proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But Ill amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
 
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus lodging. Such a waggoner
As Phaeton would whip you to the west
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaways eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalkd of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties: or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Playd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my unmannd blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle, till strange love, grow bold,
Come, night, come Romeo; come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a ravens back.
Come gentle night, come loving black-browd night,
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night,
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possessd it; and though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyd. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my Nurse,
And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
But Romeos name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Now, Nurse, what news? What hast thou there?
The cords that Romeo bid thee fetch?
Ay, ay, the cords.
 
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ah, well-a-day, hes dead, hes dead, hes dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, hes gone, hes killd, hes dead.
Can heaven be so envious?
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo.
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roard in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but Ay,
And that bare vowel I shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
I am not I if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer Ay.
If he be slain, say Ay; or if not, No.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
God save the mark!here on his manly breast.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubd in blood,
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
O, break, my heart. Poor bankrout, break at once.
To prison, eyes; neer look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had.
O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead.
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughterd and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then dreadful trumpet sound the general doom,
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,
Romeo that killd him, he is banished.
O God! Did Romeos hand shed Tybalts blood?
It did, it did; alas the day, it did.
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical,
Dove-featherd raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seemst,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace.
Theres no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men. All perjurd,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, wheres my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo.
Blisterd be thy tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is ashamd to sit;
For tis a throne where honour may be crownd
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Will you speak well of him that killd your cousin?
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I thy three-hours wife have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have killd my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring,
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you mistaking offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalts dead, that would have slain my husband.
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalts death,
That murderd me. I would forget it fain,
But O, it presses to my memory
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners minds.
Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished.
That banished, that one word banished,
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalts death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there.
Or if sour woe delights in fellowship,
And needly will be rankd with other griefs,
Why followd not, when she said Tybalts dead,
Thy father or thy mother, nay or both,
Which modern lamentation might have movd?
But with a rear-ward following Tybalts death,
Romeo is banishedto speak that word
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. Romeo is banished,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that words death, no words can that woe sound.
Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?
Weeping and wailing over Tybalts corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Wash they his wounds with tears. Mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeos banishment.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguild,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exild.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come cords, come Nurse, Ill to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead.
Hie to your chamber. Ill find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
Ill to him, he is hid at Lawrence cell.
O find him, give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
 
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enanmourd of thy parts
And thou art wedded to calamity.
Father, what news? What is the Princes doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Princes doom.
What less than doomsday is the Princes doom?
A gentler judgment vanishd from his lips,
Not bodys death, but bodys banishment.
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say death;
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say banishment.
Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence banished is banishd from the world,
And worlds exile is death. Then banished
Is death mistermd. Calling death banished,
Thou cuttst my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind Prince,
Taking thy part, hath brushd aside the law,
And turnd that black word death to banishment.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog,
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliets hand,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin.
But Romeo may not, he is banished.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly.
They are free men but I am banished.
And sayst thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mixd, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though neer so mean,
But banished to kill me? Banished?
O Friar, the damned use that word in hell.
Howlings attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend professd,
To mangle me with that word banished?
Thou fond mad man, hear me speak a little,
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Ill give thee armour to keep off that word,
Adversitys sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Yet banished? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a Princes doom,
It helps not, it prevails not, talk no more.
O, then I see that mad men have no ears.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
 
Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.
 
Hark, how they knock!Whos there?Romeo, arise,
Thou wilt be taken.Stay awhile.Stand up.
 
Run to my study.By-and-by.Gods will,
What simpleness is this.I come, I come.
 
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you, whats your will?
 Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.
Welcome then.
O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar,
Where is my ladys lord, wheres Romeo?
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
O, he is even in my mistress case.
Just in her case! O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament. Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man.
For Juliets sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Nurse.
Ah sir, ah sir, deaths the end of all.
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have staind the childhood of our joy
With blood removd but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what says
My conceald lady to our cancelld love?
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that names cursed hand
Murderd her kinsman. O, tell me, Friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.
 
Hold thy desperate hand.
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazd me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temperd.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
And slay thy lady, that in thy life lives,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why railst thou on thy birth, the heaven and earth?
Since birth, and heaven and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shamst thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, aboundst in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vowd to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldiers flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismemberd with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man. Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slewst Tybalt; there art thou happy.
The law that threatend death becomes thy friend,
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But like a misshaped and sullen wench,
Thou puttst up thy Fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou wentst forth in lamentation.
Go before, Nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.
O Lord, I could have stayd here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
My lord, Ill tell my lady you will come.
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Here sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
 
How well my comfort is revivd by this.
Go hence, good night, and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguisd from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. Ill find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand; tis late; farewell; good night.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.
 
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she lovd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
Tis very late; shell not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.
These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow;
Tonight shes mewd up to her heaviness.
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my childs love. I think she will be ruld
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,
Acquaint her here of my son Paris love,
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next,
But, soft, what day is this?
Monday, my lord.
Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
A Thursday let it be; a Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
Well keep no great ado,a friend or two,
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore well have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Farewell, my lord.Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me, it is so very very late that we
May call it early by and by. Good night.
 
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That piercd the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Nights candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet, thou needst not to be gone.
Let me be taen, let me be put to death,
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Ill say yon grey is not the mornings eye,
Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthias brow.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come, death, and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How ist, my soul? Lets talk. It is not day.
It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away.
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes.
O, now I would they had changd voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunts-up to the day.
O now be gone, more light and light it grows.
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.
Madam.
Nurse?
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke, be wary, look about.
 
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Farewell, farewell, one kiss, and Ill descend.
 
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, ay husband, friend,
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo.
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
O thinkest thou we shall ever meet again?
I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
O God! I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou lookst pale.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.
 
O Fortune, Fortune! All men call thee fickle,
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renownd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune;
For then, I hope thou wilt not keep him long
But send him back.
 Ho, daughter, are you up?
Who ist that calls? Is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustomd cause procures her hither?
Why, how now, Juliet?
Madam, I am not well.
Evermore weeping for your cousins death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
And if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done: some grief shows much of love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.
Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Well, girl, thou weepst not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughterd him.
What villain, madam?
That same villain Romeo.
Villain and he be many miles asunder.
God pardon him. I do, with all my heart.
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Ay madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousins death.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. Ill send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banishd runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomd dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Indeed I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold himdead
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vexd.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him namd, and cannot come to him,
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughterd him.
Find thou the means, and Ill find such a man.
But now Ill tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
One who to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expects not, nor I lookd not for.
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peters Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Now by Saint Peters Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed.
Here comes your father, tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brothers son
It rains downright.
How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood, the winds, thy sighs,
Who raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Have you deliverd to her our decree?
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.
Soft. Take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
How now, how now, choppd logic? What is this?
Proud, and, I thank you, and I thank you not;
And yet not proud. Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peters Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!
Fie, fie! What, are you mad?
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Hang thee young baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what,get thee to church a Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me.
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.
God in heaven bless her.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
And why, my lady wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.
I speak no treason.
O God ye good-en!
May not one speak?
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity oer a gossips bowl,
For here we need it not.
You are too hot.
Gods bread, it makes me mad!
Day, night, hour, ride, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her matchd, and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly allied,
Stuffd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportiond as ones thought would wish a man,
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortunes tender,
To answer, Ill not wed, I cannot love,
I am too young, I pray you pardon me.
But, and you will not wed, Ill pardon you.
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look tot, think ont, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise.
And you be mine, Ill give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For by my soul, Ill neer acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust tot, bethink you, Ill not be forsworn.
 
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O sweet my mother, cast me not away,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Talk not to me, for Ill not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
 
O God! O Nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Upon so soft a subject as myself.
What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, Nurse.
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished; and all the world to nothing
That he dares neer come back to challenge you.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
O, hes a lovely gentleman.
Romeos a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead, or twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.
Speakest thou from thy heart?
And from my soul too,
Or else beshrew them both.
Amen.
What?
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in, and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeasd my father, to Lawrence cell,
To make confession and to be absolvd.
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.
 
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praisd him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Ill to the Friar to know his remedy.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
 
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
You say you do not know the ladys mind.
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalts death,
And therefore have I little talkd of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway;
And in his wisdom, hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
 I would I knew not why it should be slowd.
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Happily met, my lady and my wife!
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
That may be, must be, love, on Thursday next.
What must be shall be.
Thats a certain text.
Come you to make confession to this father?
To answer that, I should confess to you.
Do not deny to him that you love me.
I will confess to you that I love him.
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.
Poor soul, thy face is much abusd with tears.
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.
Thou wrongst it more than tears with that report.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slanderd it.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye,
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.
 
O shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help!
O Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.
Tell me not, Friar, that thou hearst of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife Ill help it presently.
God joind my heart and Romeos, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeos seald,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore, out of thy long-experiencd time,
Give me some present counsel, or behold
Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die,
If what thou speakst speak not of remedy.
Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That copst with death himself to scape from it.
And if thou darst, Ill give thee remedy.
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears;
Or hide me nightly in a charnel-house,
Oer-coverd quite with dead mens rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave,
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble,
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstaind wife to my sweet love.
Hold then. Go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow;
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone,
Let not thy Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off,
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest,
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes; thy eyes windows fall,
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part deprivd of supple government,
Shall stiff and stark and cold appear like death.
And in this borrowd likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes, uncoverd, on the bier,
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Give me, give me! O tell not me of fear!
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. Ill send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father.
 
So many guests invite as here are writ.
 
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
You shall have none ill, sir; for Ill try if they can lick their
fingers.
How canst thou try them so?
Marry, sir, tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers;
therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
Go, begone.
 
We shall be much unfurnishd for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
Ay, forsooth.
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-willd harlotry it is.
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
How now, my headstrong. Where have you been gadding?
Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests; and am enjoind
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here,
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever ruld by you.
Send for the County, go tell him of this.
Ill have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence cell,
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not stepping oer the bounds of modesty.
Why, I am glad ont. This is well. Stand up.
This is ast should be. Let me see the County.
Ay, marry. Go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now afore God, this reverend holy Friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Go, Nurse, go with her. Well to church tomorrow.
 
We shall be short in our provision,
Tis now near night.
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
Ill not to bed tonight, let me alone.
Ill play the housewife for this once.What, ho!
They are all forth: well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimd.
 
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight;
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowst, is cross and full of sin.
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
No, madam; we have culld such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.
Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
 
Farewell. God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
Ill call them back again to comfort me.
Nurse!What should she do here?
Come, vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
 
What if it be a poison, which the Friar
Subtly hath ministerd to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonourd,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? Theres a fearful point!
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packd,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad.
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsmans bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
O look, methinks I see my cousins ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapiers point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo, heres drink! I drink to thee.
 
Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, Nurse.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowd,
The curfew bell hath rung, tis three oclock.
Look to the bakd meats, good Angelica;
Spare not for cost.
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed; faith, youll be sick tomorrow
For this nights watching.
No, not a whit. What! I have watchd ere now
All night for lesser cause, and neer been sick.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.
 
A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!
Now, fellow, whats there?
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
Make haste, make haste.
 
Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
 
Mass and well said; a merry whoreson, ha.
Thou shalt be loggerhead.Good faith, tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would. I hear him near.
 
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!
 Re-enter Nurse.
Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up.
Ill go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste I say.
 
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Why, lamb, why, lady, fie, you slug-abed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now.
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Marry and amen. How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
Hell fright you up, ifaith. Will it not be?
What, dressd, and in your clothes, and down again?
I must needs wake you. Lady! Lady! Lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! My ladys dead!
O, well-a-day that ever I was born.
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! My lady!
What noise is here?
O lamentable day!
What is the matter?
Look, look! O heavy day!
O me, O me! My child, my only life.
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.
For shame, bring Juliet forth, her lord is come.
Shes dead, deceasd, shes dead; alack the day!
Alack the day, shes dead, shes dead, shes dead!
Ha! Let me see her. Out alas! Shes cold,
Her blood is settled and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
O lamentable day!
O woful time!
Death, that hath taen her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Ready to go, but never to return.
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath death lain with thy bride. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die.
And leave him all; life, living, all is deaths.
Have I thought long to see this mornings face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Accursd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day.
Most miserable hour that eer time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage.
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catchd it from my sight.
O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day.
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day.
Never was seen so black a day as this.
O woeful day, O woeful day.
Beguild, divorced, wronged, spited, slain.
Most detestable death, by thee beguild,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown.
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!
Despisd, distressed, hated, martyrd, killd.
Uncomfortable time, why camst thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! My soul, and not my child,
Dead art thou. Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are buried.
Peace, ho, for shame. Confusions cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid, now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For twas your heaven she should be advancd,
And weep ye now, seeing she is advancd
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
Shes not well married that lives married long,
But shes best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array bear her to church;
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet natures tears are reasons merriment.
All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris, everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lower upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For well you know this is a pitiful case.
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
 
Musicians, O, musicians, Hearts ease, Hearts ease, O, and you
will have me live, play Hearts ease.
Why Hearts ease?
O musicians, because my heart itself plays My heart is full. O play
me some merry dump to comfort me.
Not a dump we, tis no time to play now.
You will not then?
No.
I will then give it you soundly.
What will you give us?
No money, on my faith, but the gleek! I will give you the minstrel.
Then will I give you the serving-creature.
Then will I lay the serving-creatures dagger on your pate. I will
carry no crotchets. Ill re you, Ill fa you. Do you note me?
And you re us and fa us, you note us.
Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you with an iron wit, and
put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
    When griping griefs the heart doth wound,
      And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
    Then music with her silver sound
Why silver sound? Why music with her silver sound? What say you,
Simon Catling?
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Prates. What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
I say silver sound because musicians sound for silver.
Prates too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Faith, I know not what to say.
O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is
music with her silver sound because musicians have no gold for
sounding.
      Then music with her silver sound
      With speedy help doth lend redress.
 
What a pestilent knave is this same!
Hang him, Jack. Come, well in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay
dinner.
 
If I may trust the flattering eye of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosoms lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustomd spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead,
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!
And breathd such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revivd, and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessd,
When but loves shadows are so rich in joy.
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again;
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capels monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindreds vault,
And presently took post to tell it you.
O pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Is it even so? Then I defy you, stars!
Thou knowst my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.
I do beseech you sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.
Tush, thou art deceivd.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?
No, my good lord.
No matter. Get thee gone,
And hire those horses. Ill be with thee straight.
 
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Lets see for means. O mischief thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an apothecary,
And hereabouts he dwells,which late I noted
In tatterd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples, meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffd, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scatterd, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
And if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggars shop is shut.
What, ho! Apothecary!
Who calls so loud?
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be dischargd of breath
As violently as hasty powder fird
Doth hurry from the fatal cannons womb.
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantuas law
Is death to any he that utters them.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fearst to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the worlds law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
My poverty, but not my will consents.
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would despatch you straight.
There is thy gold, worse poison to mens souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none.
Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliets grave, for there must I use thee.
 
Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, ho!
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seald up the doors, and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stayd.
Who bare my letter then to Romeo?
I could not send it,here it is again,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto my cell.
Brother, Ill go and bring it thee.
 
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, closd in a dead mans tomb.
 
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hearst something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
 I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.
 
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or wanting that, with tears distilld by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep,
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
 
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way tonight,
To cross my obsequies and true loves rite?
What, with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.
 
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light; upon thy life I charge thee,
Whateer thou hearst or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my ladys face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
But if thou jealous dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven I will tear thee joint by joint,
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild;
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Live, and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.
For all this same, Ill hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
 
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorgd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
 
And in despite, Ill cram thee with more food.
This is that banishd haughty Montague
That murderd my loves cousin,with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died,
And here is come to do some villanous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
 
Stop thy unhallowd toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursud further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey, and go with me, for thou must die.
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O be gone.
By heaven I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither armd against myself.
Stay not, be gone, live, and hereafter say,
A madmans mercy bid thee run away.
I do defy thy conjuration,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
 
O lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
 
O, I am slain!  If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.
 
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutios kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortunes book.
Ill bury thee in a triumphant grave.
A grave? O no, a lantern, slaughtred youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interrd.
 
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! Which their keepers call
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love, my wife,
Death that hath suckd the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquerd. Beautys ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And deaths pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin. Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous;
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will stay with thee,
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest;
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last.
Arms, take your last embrace! And, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death.
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide.
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark.
Heres to my love!  O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
 
 Enter, at the other end of the Churchyard, Friar Lawrence, with a
 lantern, crow, and spade.
Saint Francis be my speed. How oft tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves? Whos there?
Who is it that consorts, so late, the dead?
Heres one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels monument.
It doth so, holy sir, and theres my master,
One that you love.
Who is it?
Romeo.
How long hath he been there?
Full half an hour.
Go with me to the vault.
I dare not, sir;
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.
Stay then, Ill go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.
Romeo! 
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolourd by this place of peace?
 
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steepd in blood? Ah what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance?
The lady stirs.
 
O comfortable Friar, where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
 
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, Ill dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
 
Whats here? A cup closd in my true loves hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
O churl. Drink all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.
 
Thy lips are warm!
 Lead, boy. Which way?
Yea, noise? Then Ill be brief. O happy dagger.
 his is thy sheath.  There rest, and let me die.
 his is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
The ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Go, some of you, whoeer you find attach.
 
Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Go tell the Prince; run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues, some others search.
 
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.
 Re-enter some of the Watch with Balthasar.
Heres Romeos man. We found him in the churchyard.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
 Re-enter others of the Watch with Friar Lawrence.
Here is a Friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
A great suspicion. Stay the Friar too.
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our mornings rest?
What should it be that they so shriek abroad?
O the people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new killd.
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Here is a Friar, and slaughterd Romeos man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead mens tombs.
O heaven! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mistaen, for lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathed in my daughters bosom.
O me! This sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Come, Montague, for thou art early up,
To see thy son and heir more early down.
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.
Grief of my sons exile hath stoppd her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?
Look, and thou shalt see.
O thou untaught! What manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent,
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excusd.
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeos faithful wife.
I married them; and their stoln marriage day
Was Tybalts doomsday, whose untimely death
Banishd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pind.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betrothd, and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks, bid me devise some means
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutored by my art,
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrowd grave,
Being the time the potions force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stayd by accident; and yesternight
Returnd my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindreds vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her Nurse is privy. And if ought in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificd, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Wheres Romeos man? What can he say to this?
I brought my master news of Juliets death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threatend me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not, and left him there.
Give me the letter, I will look on it.
Where is the Countys Page that raisd the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
He came with flowers to strew his ladys grave,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.
This letter doth make good the Friars words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death.
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punishd.
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
This is my daughters jointure, for no more
Can I demand.
But I can give thee more,
For I will raise her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
As rich shall Romeos by his ladys lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardond, and some punished,
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
Draws on apace; four happy days bring in
Another moon; but oh, methinks, how slow
This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires,
Like to a step-dame or a dowager,
Long withering out a young mans revenue.
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
And then the moon, like to a silver bow
New bent in heaven, shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.
Go, Philostrate,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth;
Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
The pale companion is not for our pomp.
 
Hippolyta, I wood thee with my sword,
And won thy love doing thee injuries;
But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling.
Happy be Theseus, our renownd Duke!
Thanks, good Egeus. Whats the news with thee?
Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.
Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.
Stand forth, Lysander. And, my gracious Duke,
This man hath bewitchd the bosom of my child.
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes,
And interchangd love-tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung,
With feigning voice, verses of feigning love;
And stoln the impression of her fantasy
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats (messengers
Of strong prevailment in unhardend youth)
With cunning hast thou filchd my daughters heart,
Turnd her obedience (which is due to me)
To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious Duke,
Be it so she will not here before your grace
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
As she is mine I may dispose of her;
Which shall be either to this gentleman
Or to her death, according to our law
Immediately provided in that case.
What say you, Hermia? Be advisd, fair maid.
To you your father should be as a god;
One that composd your beauties, yea, and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure, or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
So is Lysander.
In himself he is.
But in this kind, wanting your fathers voice,
The other must be held the worthier.
I would my father lookd but with my eyes.
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
Nor how it may concern my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts:
But I beseech your Grace that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case,
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
Either to die the death, or to abjure
For ever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether, if you yield not to your fathers choice,
You can endure the livery of a nun,
For aye to be in shady cloister mewd,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessd they that master so their blood
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
But earthlier happy is the rose distilld
Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
Unto his lordship, whose unwishd yoke
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.
Take time to pause; and by the next new moon
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me
For everlasting bond of fellowship,
Upon that day either prepare to die
For disobedience to your fathers will,
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Or on Dianas altar to protest
For aye austerity and single life.
Relent, sweet Hermia; and, Lysander, yield
Thy crazd title to my certain right.
You have her fathers love, Demetrius.
Let me have Hermias. Do you marry him.
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
And what is mine my love shall render him;
And she is mine, and all my right of her
I do estate unto Demetrius.
I am, my lord, as well derivd as he,
As well possessd; my love is more than his;
My fortunes every way as fairly rankd,
If not with vantage, as Demetrius;
And, which is more than all these boasts can be,
I am belovd of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, Ill avouch it to his head,
Made love to Nedars daughter, Helena,
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
I must confess that I have heard so much,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
But, being over-full of self-affairs,
My mind did lose it.But, Demetrius, come,
And come, Egeus; you shall go with me.
I have some private schooling for you both.
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
To fit your fancies to your fathers will,
Or else the law of Athens yields you up
(Which by no means we may extenuate)
To death, or to a vow of single life.
Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?
Demetrius and Egeus, go along;
I must employ you in some business
Against our nuptial, and confer with you
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
With duty and desire we follow you.
 
How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
Belike for want of rain, which I could well
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
Ay me! For aught that I could ever read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth.
But either it was different in blood
O cross! Too high to be enthralld to low.
Or else misgraffd in respect of years
O spite! Too old to be engagd to young.
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends
O hell! to choose love by anothers eyes!
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it momentany as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
And, ere a man hath power to say, Behold!
The jaws of darkness do devour it up:
So quick bright things come to confusion.
If then true lovers have ever crossd,
It stands as an edict in destiny.
Then let us teach our trial patience,
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
Wishes and tears, poor fancys followers.
A good persuasion; therefore, hear me, Hermia.
I have a widow aunt, a dowager
Of great revenue, and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,
And she respects me as her only son.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee,
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then,
Steal forth thy fathers house tomorrow night;
And in the wood, a league without the town
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena
To do observance to a morn of May),
There will I stay for thee.
My good Lysander!
I swear to thee by Cupids strongest bow,
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the simplicity of Venus doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire which burnd the Carthage queen
When the false Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke
(In number more than ever women spoke),
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.
God speed fair Helena! Whither away?
Call you me fair? That fair again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
Your eyes are lode-stars and your tongues sweet air
More tuneable than lark to shepherds ear,
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching. O were favour so,
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,
My tongue should catch your tongues sweet melody.
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The rest Id give to be to you translated.
O, teach me how you look, and with what art
You sway the motion of Demetrius heart!
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
O that my prayers could such affection move!
The more I hate, the more he follows me.
The more I love, the more he hateth me.
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
None but your beauty; would that fault were mine!
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see,
Seemd Athens as a paradise to me.
O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,
That he hath turnd a heaven into hell!
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:
Tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver visage in the watery glass,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass
(A time that lovers flights doth still conceal),
Through Athens gates have we devisd to steal.
And in the wood where often you and I
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet,
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,
To seek new friends and stranger companies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us,
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!
Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight
From lovers food, till morrow deep midnight.
I will, my Hermia.
 
Helena, adieu.
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!
 
How happy some oer other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
He will not know what all but he do know.
And as he errs, doting on Hermias eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
Love can transpose to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;
And therefore is wingd Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath loves mind of any judgment taste.
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste.
And therefore is love said to be a child,
Because in choice he is so oft beguild.
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
So the boy Love is perjurd everywhere.
For, ere Demetrius lookd on Hermias eyne,
He haild down oaths that he was only mine;
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolvd, and showers of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermias flight.
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night
Pursue her; and for this intelligence
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither and back again.
 
Is all our company here?
You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the
scrip.
Here is the scroll of every mans name, which is thought fit through
all Athens, to play in our interlude before the Duke and Duchess, on
his wedding-day at night.
First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on; then read the
Marry, our play is _The most lamentable comedy and most cruel death of
Pyramus and Thisbe_.
A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry. Now, good Peter
yourselves.
Answer, as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.
Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
What is Pyramusa lover, or a tyrant?
A lover, that kills himself most gallantly for love.
That will ask some tears in the true performing of it. If I do it, let
the audience look to their eyes. I will move storms; I will condole in
some measure. To the restyet my chief humour is for a tyrant. I could
play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in, to make all split.
    The raging rocks
    And shivering shocks
    Shall break the locks
           Of prison gates,
    And Phibbus car
    Shall shine from far,
    And make and mar
           The foolish Fates.
This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players. This is Ercles vein,
a tyrants vein; a lover is more condoling.
Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.
Here, Peter Quince.
Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.
What is Thisbe? A wandering knight?
It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
Nay, faith, let not me play a woman. I have a beard coming.
Thats all one. You shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small
as you will.
And I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too. Ill speak in a
monstrous little voice; Thisne, Thisne!Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear!
thy Thisbe dear! and lady dear!
No, no, you must play Pyramus; and, Flute, you Thisbe.
Well, proceed.
Robin Starveling, the tailor.
Here, Peter Quince.
Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbes mother.
Tom Snout, the tinker.
SNOUT
Here, Peter Quince.
You, Pyramus father; myself, Thisbes father;
Snug, the joiner, you, the lions part. And, I hope here is a play
fitted.
SNUG
Have you the lions part written? Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I
am slow of study.
You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will do any mans heart
good to hear me. I will roar that I will make the Duke say Let him
roar again, let him roar again.
If you should do it too terribly, you would fright the Duchess and the
ladies, that they would shriek; and that were enough to hang us all.
ALL
That would hang us every mothers son.
I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their
wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us. But I will
aggravate my voice so, that I will roar you as gently as any sucking
dove; I will roar you an twere any nightingale.
You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus is a sweet-faced man; a
proper man as one shall see in a summers day; a most lovely
gentleman-like man. Therefore you must needs play Pyramus.
Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play it in?
Why, what you will.
I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard, your
orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your
French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.
Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play
bare-faced. But, masters, here are your parts, and I am to entreat you,
request you, and desire you, to con them by tomorrow night; and meet me
in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight; there will
we rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall be doggd with
company, and our devices known. In the meantime I will draw a bill of
properties, such as our play wants. I pray you fail me not.
courageously. Take pains, be perfect; adieu.
At the Dukes oak we meet.
Enough. Hold, or cut bow-strings.
 
How now, spirit! Whither wander you?
    Over hill, over dale,
        Thorough bush, thorough brier,
    Over park, over pale,
        Thorough flood, thorough fire,
    I do wander everywhere,
    Swifter than the moons sphere;
    And I serve the Fairy Queen,
    To dew her orbs upon the green.
    The cowslips tall her pensioners be,
    In their gold coats spots you see;
    Those be rubies, fairy favours,
    In those freckles live their savours.
I must go seek some dew-drops here,
And hang a pearl in every cowslips ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits; Ill be gone.
Our Queen and all her elves come here anon.
The King doth keep his revels here tonight;
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
Because that she, as her attendant, hath
A lovely boy, stoln from an Indian king;
She never had so sweet a changeling.
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild:
But she perforce withholds the lovd boy,
Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,
But they do square; that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups, and hide them there.
FAIRY
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
Calld Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
That frights the maidens of the villagery,
Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern,
And bootless make the breathless housewife churn,
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?
Thou speakst aright;
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile,
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal;
And sometime lurk I in a gossips bowl
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob,
And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
And tailor cries, and falls into a cough;
And then the whole quire hold their hips and loffe
And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.
FAIRY
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!
 hers.
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.
What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence;
I have forsworn his bed and company.
Tarry, rash wanton; am not I thy lord?
Then I must be thy lady; but I know
When thou hast stoln away from fairyland,
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
Come from the farthest steep of India,
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
Your buskind mistress and your warrior love,
To Theseus must be wedded; and you come
To give their bed joy and prosperity?
How canst thou thus, for shame, Titania,
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night
From Perigenia, whom he ravished?
And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?
These are the forgeries of jealousy:
And never, since the middle summers spring,
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
By pavd fountain, or by rushy brook,
Or on the beachd margent of the sea,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbd our sport.
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
As in revenge, have suckd up from the sea
Contagious fogs; which, falling in the land,
Hath every pelting river made so proud
That they have overborne their continents.
The ox hath therefore stretchd his yoke in vain,
The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere his youth attaind a beard.
The fold stands empty in the drownd field,
And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;
The nine-mens-morris is filld up with mud,
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want their winter here.
No night is now with hymn or carol blest.
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
That rheumatic diseases do abound.
And thorough this distemperature we see
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose;
And on old Hiems thin and icy crown
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
The childing autumn, angry winter, change
Their wonted liveries; and the mazed world,
By their increase, now knows not which is which.
And this same progeny of evils comes
From our debate, from our dissension;
We are their parents and original.
Do you amend it, then. It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I do but beg a little changeling boy
To be my henchman.
Set your heart at rest;
The fairyland buys not the child of me.
His mother was a votress of my order,
And in the spicd Indian air, by night,
Full often hath she gossipd by my side;
And sat with me on Neptunes yellow sands,
Marking th embarkd traders on the flood,
When we have laughd to see the sails conceive,
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait
Following (her womb then rich with my young squire),
Would imitate, and sail upon the land,
To fetch me trifles, and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die;
And for her sake do I rear up her boy,
And for her sake I will not part with him.
How long within this wood intend you stay?
Perchance till after Theseus wedding-day.
If you will patiently dance in our round,
And see our moonlight revels, go with us;
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if I longer stay.
 
Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove
Till I torment thee for this injury.
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou remembrest
Since once I sat upon a promontory,
And heard a mermaid on a dolphins back
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
That the rude sea grew civil at her song
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
To hear the sea-maids music.
I remember.
That very time I saw, (but thou couldst not),
Flying between the cold moon and the earth,
Cupid all armd: a certain aim he took
At a fair vestal, thrond by the west,
And loosd his love-shaft smartly from his bow
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupids fiery shaft
Quenchd in the chaste beams of the watery moon;
And the imperial votress passed on,
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
Yet markd I where the bolt of Cupid fell:
It fell upon a little western flower,
Before milk-white, now purple with loves wound,
And maidens call it love-in-idleness.
Fetch me that flower, the herb I showed thee once:
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
Ere the leviathan can swim a league.
Ill put a girdle round about the earth
In forty minutes.
 
Having once this juice,
Ill watch Titania when she is asleep,
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes:
The next thing then she waking looks upon
(Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape)
She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
And ere I take this charm from off her sight
(As I can take it with another herb)
Ill make her render up her page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible;
And I will overhear their conference.
I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
The one Ill slay, the other slayeth me.
Thou toldst me they were stoln into this wood,
And here am I, and wode within this wood
Because I cannot meet with Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant,
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.
Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
Or rather do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you?
And even for that do I love you the more.
I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,
The more you beat me, I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,
Unworthy as I am, to follow you.
What worser place can I beg in your love,
(And yet a place of high respect with me)
Than to be usd as you use your dog?
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit;
For I am sick when I do look on thee.
And I am sick when I look not on you.
You do impeach your modesty too much
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
To trust the opportunity of night.
And the ill counsel of a desert place,
With the rich worth of your virginity.
Your virtue is my privilege: for that.
It is not night when I do see your face,
Therefore I think I am not in the night;
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you, in my respect, are all the world.
Then how can it be said I am alone
When all the world is here to look on me?
Ill run from thee and hide me in the brakes,
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
Run when you will, the story shall be changd;
Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;
The dove pursues the griffin, the mild hind
Makes speed to catch the tiger. Bootless speed,
When cowardice pursues and valour flies!
I will not stay thy questions. Let me go,
Or if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
We cannot fight for love as men may do.
We should be wood, and were not made to woo.
 
Ill follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,
To die upon the hand I love so well.
 
Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove,
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
Ay, there it is.
I pray thee give it me.
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,
With sweet musk-roses, and with eglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Lulld in these flowers with dances and delight;
And there the snake throws her enamelld skin,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in.
And with the juice of this Ill streak her eyes,
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:
A sweet Athenian lady is in love
With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes;
But do it when the next thing he espies
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More fond on her than she upon her love:
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
Fear not, my lord, your servant shall do so.
 
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
Then for the third part of a minute, hence;
Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds;
Some war with reremice for their leathern wings,
To make my small elves coats; and some keep back
The clamorous owl, that nightly hoots and wonders
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;
Then to your offices, and let me rest.
Fairies sing.
    You spotted snakes with double tongue,
       Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;
    Newts and blind-worms do no wrong,
       Come not near our Fairy Queen:
    Philomel, with melody,
    Sing in our sweet lullaby:
Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby.
    Never harm, nor spell, nor charm,
    Come our lovely lady nigh;
    So good night, with lullaby.
    Weaving spiders, come not here;
       Hence, you long-leggd spinners, hence.
    Beetles black, approach not near;
       Worm nor snail do no offence.
    Philomel with melody, &c.
Hence away! Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.
 
What thou seest when thou dost wake,

Do it for thy true love take;
Love and languish for his sake.
Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
Pard, or boar with bristled hair,
In thy eye that shall appear
When thou wakst, it is thy dear.
Wake when some vile thing is near.
 
Fair love, you faint with wandring in the wood.
And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way.
Well rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
And tarry for the comfort of the day.
Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear,
Lie further off yet, do not lie so near.
O take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
Love takes the meaning in loves conference.
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
So that but one heart we can make of it:
Two bosoms interchaind with an oath,
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
Then by your side no bed-room me deny;
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied!
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy
Lie further off, in human modesty,
Such separation as may well be said
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend:
Thy love neer alter till thy sweet life end!
Amen, amen, to that fair prayer say I;
And then end life when I end loyalty!
Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!
With half that wish the wishers eyes be pressed!
 
Through the forest have I gone,
But Athenian found I none,
On whose eyes I might approve
This flowers force in stirring love.
Night and silence! Who is here?
Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
This is he, my master said,
Despisd the Athenian maid;
And here the maiden, sleeping sound,
On the dank and dirty ground.
Pretty soul, she durst not lie
Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
All the power this charm doth owe;
When thou wakst let love forbid
Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
So awake when I am gone;
For I must now to Oberon.
 
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.
Stay, on thy peril; I alone will go.
 
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoeer she lies,
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftener washd than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
For beasts that meet me run away for fear:
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus.
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
Made me compare with Hermias sphery eyne?
But who is here? Lysander, on the ground!
Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.
 And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
Do not say so, Lysander, say not so.
What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?
Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.
Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia, but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The will of man is by his reason swayd,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason;
And touching now the point of human skill,
Reason becomes the marshal to my will,
And leads me to your eyes, where I oerlook
Loves stories, written in loves richest book.
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
Ist not enough, ist not enough, young man,
That I did never, no, nor never can
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well; perforce I must confess,
I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
O, that a lady of one man refusd,
Should of another therefore be abusd!
 
She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there,
And never mayst thou come Lysander near!
For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings;
Or as the heresies that men do leave
Are hated most of those they did deceive;
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
And, all my powers, address your love and might
To honour Helen, and to be her knight!
 
 Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast!
Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
Methought a serpent eat my heart away,
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
Lysander! What, removed? Lysander! lord!
What, out of hearing? Gone? No sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? Speak, and if you hear;
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
Either death or you Ill find immediately.
 
 The Queen of Fairies still lying asleep.
Are we all met?
Pat, pat; and heres a marvellous convenient place for our rehearsal.
This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn brake our
Duke.
Peter Quince?
What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never
please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself; which the
ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?
SNOUT
Byr lakin, a parlous fear.
I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.
Not a whit; I have a device to make all well. Write me a prologue, and
let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and
that Pyramus is not killed indeed; and for the more better assurance,
tell them that I Pyramus am not Pyramus but Bottom the weaver. This
will put them out of fear.
Well, we will have such a prologue; and it shall be written in eight
and six.
No, make it two more; let it be written in eight and eight.
SNOUT
Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
I fear it, I promise you.
Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves, to bring in (God shield
us!) a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. For there is not a
more fearful wild-fowl than your lion living; and we ought to look to
it.
SNOUT
Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.
Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the
lions neck; and he himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the
same defect: Ladies, or, Fair ladies, I would wish you, or, I
would request you, or, I would entreat you, not to fear, not to
tremble: my life for yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it
were pity of my life. No, I am no such thing; I am a man as other men
are: and there, indeed, let him name his name, and tell them plainly
he is Snug the joiner.
Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things: that is, to bring
the moonlight into a chamber, for you know, Pyramus and Thisbe meet by
moonlight.
SNOUT
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanack; find out moonshine, find
out moonshine.
Yes, it doth shine that night.
Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber window, where
we play, open; and the moon may shine in at the casement.
Ay; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and
say he comes to disfigure or to present the person of Moonshine. Then
there is another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber; for
Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story, did talk through the chink of a
wall.
SNOUT
You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?
Some man or other must present Wall. And let him have some plaster, or
some loam, or some rough-cast about him, to signify wall; and let him
hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe
whisper.
If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every mothers son,
and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin: when you have spoken your
speech, enter into that brake; and so everyone according to his cue.
What hempen homespuns have we swaggering here,
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play toward? Ill be an auditor;
Speak, Pyramus.Thisbe, stand forth.
_Thisbe, the flowers of odious savours sweet_
Odours, odours.
_. . . odours savours sweet.
So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.
But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
And by and by I will to thee appear._
 
A stranger Pyramus than eer played here!
 
Must I speak now?
Ay, marry, must you, For you must understand he goes but to see a noise
that he heard, and is to come again.
_Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
Most brisky juvenal, and eke most lovely Jew,
As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire,
Ill meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninnys tomb._
Ninus tomb, man! Why, you must not speak that yet. That you answer to
Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues, and all.Pyramus enter!
Your cue is past; it is never tire.
O, _As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire._
_If I were fair, Thisbe, I were only thine._
O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters, fly, masters!
Help!
 
Ill follow you. Ill lead you about a round,
   Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier;
Sometime a horse Ill be, sometime a hound,
   A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire;
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
 
Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make me afeard.
SNOUT
O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on thee?
What do you see? You see an ass-head of your own, do you?
 
Bless thee, Bottom! bless thee! Thou art translated.
 
I see their knavery. This is to make an ass of me, to fright me, if
they could. But I will not stir from this place, do what they can. I
will walk up and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear I am
not afraid.

       The ousel cock, so black of hue,
          With orange-tawny bill,
       The throstle with his note so true,
          The wren with little quill.
 What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?

       The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
          The plain-song cuckoo gray,
       Whose note full many a man doth mark,
          And dares not answer nay.
for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird? Who would give
a bird the lie, though he cry cuckoo never so?
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
Mine ear is much enamourd of thy note.
So is mine eye enthralld to thy shape;
And thy fair virtues force perforce doth move me,
On the first view, to say, to swear, I love thee.
Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that. And yet, to
say the truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays.
The more the pity that some honest neighbours will not make them
friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occasion.
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
Not so, neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of this wood, I
have enough to serve mine own turn.
Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate.
The summer still doth tend upon my state;
And I do love thee: therefore, go with me.
Ill give thee fairies to attend on thee;
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep,
And sing, while thou on pressd flowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.
Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed!
Ready.
And I.
And I.
And I.
Where shall we go?
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman;
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,
And for night-tapers, crop their waxen thighs,
And light them at the fiery glow-worms eyes,
To have my love to bed and to arise;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies,
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
Hail, mortal!
Hail!
Hail!
Hail!
I cry your worships mercy, heartily.I beseech your worships name.
Cobweb.
I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Cobweb. If I cut
my finger, I shall make bold with you.Your name, honest gentleman?
Peaseblossom.
I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and to Master
Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of
more acquaintance too.Your name, I beseech you, sir?
Mustardseed.
Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well. That same cowardly
giant-like ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I
promise you, your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. I desire you
of more acquaintance, good Master Mustardseed.
Come, wait upon him; lead him to my bower.
   The moon, methinks, looks with a watery eye,
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
   Lamenting some enforced chastity.
Tie up my loves tongue, bring him silently.
 
I wonder if Titania be awakd;
Then, what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on in extremity.
Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit?
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus nuptial day.
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort
Who Pyramus presented in their sport,
When I did him at this advantage take,
An asss nole I fixed on his head.
Anon, his Thisbe must be answerd,
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Rising and cawing at the guns report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
And at our stamp, here oer and oer one falls;
He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears, thus strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch;
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch.
And left sweet Pyramus translated there.
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
Titania wakd, and straightway lovd an ass.
This falls out better than I could devise.
But hast thou yet latchd the Athenians eyes
With the love-juice, as I did bid thee do?
I took him sleepingthat is finishd too
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That, when he wakd, of force she must be eyd.
Stand close. This is the same Athenian.
This is the woman, but not this the man.
O why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being oer shoes in blood, plunge in the deep,
And kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day
As he to me. Would he have stoln away
From sleeping Hermia? Ill believe as soon
This whole earth may be bord, and that the moon
May through the centre creep and so displease
Her brothers noontide with th Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murderd him.
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.
So should the murderd look, and so should I,
Piercd through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.
Whats this to my Lysander? Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou drivst me past the bounds
Of maidens patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never numberd among men!
O once tell true; tell true, even for my sake!
Durst thou have lookd upon him, being awake,
And hast thou killd him sleeping? O brave touch!
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
An adder did it; for with doubler tongue
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
You spend your passion on a misprisd mood:
I am not guilty of Lysanders blood;
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
And if I could, what should I get therefore?
A privilege never to see me more.
And from thy hated presence part I so:
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
 
There is no following her in this fierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
So sorrows heaviness doth heavier grow
For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe;
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.
 
What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite,
And laid the love-juice on some true-loves sight.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
Some true love turnd, and not a false turnd true.
Then fate oer-rules, that, one man holding troth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
About the wood go swifter than the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy-sick she is, and pale of cheer
With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here;
Ill charm his eyes against she do appear.
I go, I go; look how I go,
Swifter than arrow from the Tartars bow.
 
    Flower of this purple dye,
    Hit with Cupids archery,
    Sink in apple of his eye.
    When his love he doth espy,
    Let her shine as gloriously
    As the Venus of the sky.
    When thou wakst, if she be by,
    Beg of her for remedy.
    Captain of our fairy band,
    Helena is here at hand,
    And the youth mistook by me,
    Pleading for a lovers fee.
    Shall we their fond pageant see?
    Lord, what fools these mortals be!
    Stand aside. The noise they make
    Will cause Demetrius to awake.
    Then will two at once woo one.
    That must needs be sport alone;
    And those things do best please me
    That befall prepostrously.
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
Scorn and derision never come in tears.
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
In their nativity all truth appears.
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true?
You do advance your cunning more and more.
When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray!
These vows are Hermias: will you give her oer?
Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh:
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
Will even weigh; and both as light as tales.
I had no judgment when to her I swore.
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her oer.
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
 O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy. O how ripe in show
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congeald white, high Taurus snow,
Fannd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou holdst up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
To set against me for your merriment.
If you were civil, and knew courtesy,
You would not do me thus much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
If you were men, as men you are in show,
You would not use a gentle lady so;
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals, and love Hermia;
And now both rivals, to mock Helena.
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
To conjure tears up in a poor maids eyes
With your derision! None of noble sort
Would so offend a virgin, and extort
A poor souls patience, all to make you sport.
You are unkind, Demetrius; be not so,
For you love Hermia; this you know I know.
And here, with all good will, with all my heart,
In Hermias love I yield you up my part;
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
Whom I do love and will do till my death.
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
Lysander, keep thy Hermia; I will none.
If eer I lovd her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojournd;
And now to Helen is it home returnd,
There to remain.
Helen, it is not so.
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.
Look where thy love comes; yonder is thy dear.
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?
What love could press Lysander from my side?
Lysanders love, that would not let him bide,
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
Why seekst thou me? Could not this make thee know
The hate I bare thee made me leave thee so?
You speak not as you think; it cannot be.
Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
Now I perceive they have conjoind all three
To fashion this false sport in spite of me.
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid!
Have you conspird, have you with these contrivd,
To bait me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shard,
The sisters vows, the hours that we have spent,
When we have chid the hasty-footed time
For parting usO, is all forgot?
All school-days friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
Have with our needles created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds,
Had been incorporate. So we grew together,
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet a union in partition,
Two lovely berries moulded on one stem;
So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart;
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crownd with one crest.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly, tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
Though I alone do feel the injury.
I am amazd at your passionate words:
I scorn you not; it seems that you scorn me.
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
To follow me, and praise my eyes and face?
And made your other love, Demetrius,
Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love, so rich within his soul,
And tender me, forsooth, affection,
But by your setting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
But miserable most, to love unlovd?
This you should pity rather than despise.
I understand not what you mean by this.
Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other; hold the sweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an argument.
But fare ye well. Tis partly my own fault,
Which death, or absence, soon shall remedy.
Stay, gentle Helena; hear my excuse;
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!
O excellent!
Sweet, do not scorn her so.
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat;
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.
Helen, I love thee, by my life I do;
I swear by that which I will lose for thee
To prove him false that says I love thee not.
I say I love thee more than he can do.
If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too.
Quick, come.
Lysander, whereto tends all this?
Away, you Ethiope!
No, no. He will
Seem to break loose. Take on as you would follow,
But yet come not. You are a tame man, go!
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
Sweet love?
Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out!
Out, loathd medicine! O hated potion, hence!
Do you not jest?
Yes, sooth, and so do you.
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
I would I had your bond; for I perceive
A weak bond holds you; Ill not trust your word.
What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
Although I hate her, Ill not harm her so.
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me? Wherefore? O me! what news, my love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
Since night you lovd me; yet since night you left me.
Why then, you left meO, the gods forbid!
In earnest, shall I say?
Ay, by my life;
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt;
Be certain, nothing truer; tis no jest
That I do hate thee and love Helena.
O me! You juggler! You cankerblossom!
You thief of love! What! have you come by night
And stoln my loves heart from him?
Fine, i faith!
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie, you counterfeit, you puppet, you!
Puppet! Why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made compare
Between our statures; she hath urgd her height;
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevaild with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak,
How low am I? I am not yet so low
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
I have no gift at all in shrewishness;
I am a right maid for my cowardice;
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
Because she is something lower than myself,
That I can match her.
Lower! Hark, again.
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia,
Did ever keep your counsels, never wrongd you,
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
He followd you; for love I followd him;
But he hath chid me hence, and threatend me
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too:
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back,
And follow you no further. Let me go:
You see how simple and how fond I am.
Why, get you gone. Who ist that hinders you?
A foolish heart that I leave here behind.
What! with Lysander?
With Demetrius.
Be not afraid; she shall not harm thee, Helena.
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
O, when shes angry, she is keen and shrewd.
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.
Little again! Nothing but low and little?
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.
Get you gone, you dwarf;
You minimus, of hindring knot-grass made;
You bead, you acorn.
You are too officious
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone. Speak not of Helena;
Take not her part; for if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt aby it.
Now she holds me not.
Now follow, if thou darst, to try whose right,
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
Follow! Nay, Ill go with thee, cheek by jole.
 
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
Nay, go not back.
I will not trust you, I,
Nor longer stay in your curst company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer though, to run away.
 
I am amazd, and know not what to say.

This is thy negligence: still thou mistakst,
Or else commitst thy knaveries willfully.
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have nointed an Athenians eyes:
And so far am I glad it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
The starry welkin cover thou anon
With drooping fog, as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy rivals so astray
As one come not within anothers way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue,
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius.
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
Till oer their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
Then crush this herb into Lysanders eye,
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
To take from thence all error with his might
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision;
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
With league whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
Ill to my queen, and beg her Indian boy;
And then I will her charmd eye release
From monsters view, and all things shall be peace.
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For nights swift dragons cut the clouds full fast;
And yonder shines Auroras harbinger,
At whose approach, ghosts wandering here and there
Troop home to churchyards. Damnd spirits all,
That in cross-ways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone;
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
They wilfully themselves exile from light,
And must for aye consort with black-browd night.
But we are spirits of another sort:
I with the mornings love have oft made sport;
And, like a forester, the groves may tread
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessd beams,
Turns into yellow gold his salt-green streams.
But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay.
We may effect this business yet ere day.
 
    Up and down, up and down,
    I will lead them up and down.
    I am feard in field and town.
    Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.
Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?
I will be with thee straight.
Follow me then to plainer ground.
 
Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak. In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou lookst for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, recreant, come, thou child!
Ill whip thee with a rod. He is defild
That draws a sword on thee.
Yea, art thou there?
Follow my voice; well try no manhood here.
 
He goes before me, and still dares me on;
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heeld than I:
I followd fast, but faster he did fly,
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me.  Come, thou gentle day!
 For if but once thou show me thy grey light,
Ill find Demetrius, and revenge this spite.
 
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why comst thou not?
Abide me, if thou darst; for well I wot
Thou runnst before me, shifting every place,
And darst not stand, nor look me in the face.
Where art thou?
Come hither; I am here.
Nay, then, thou mockst me. Thou shalt buy this dear
If ever I thy face by daylight see:
Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By days approach look to be visited.
 
O weary night, O long and tedious night,
    Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east,
That I may back to Athens by daylight,
    From these that my poor company detest.
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrows eye,
Steal me awhile from mine own company.
 
    Yet but three? Come one more.
    Two of both kinds makes up four.
    Here she comes, curst and sad.
    Cupid is a knavish lad
    Thus to make poor females mad.
Never so weary, never so in woe,
   Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briers,
I can no further crawl, no further go;
   My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray!
 
         On the ground
         Sleep sound.
         Ill apply
         To your eye,
       Gentle lover, remedy.

         When thou wakst,
         Thou takst
         True delight
         In the sight
       Of thy former ladys eye.
       And the country proverb known,
       That every man should take his own,
       In your waking shall be shown:
         Jack shall have Jill;
         Nought shall go ill;
The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
 
 Lysander, Demetrius, Helena and Hermia still asleep.
 other Fairies attending; Oberon behind, unseen.
Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed,
   While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head,
   And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
Wheres Peaseblossom?
Ready.
Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Wheres Monsieur Cobweb?
Ready.
Monsieur Cobweb; good monsieur, get you your weapons in your hand and
kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle; and, good
monsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret yourself too much in the
not; I would be loath to have you overflown with a honey-bag, signior.
Wheres Monsieur Mustardseed?
Ready.
Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed. Pray you, leave your courtesy,
good monsieur.
Whats your will?
Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch. I must
to the barbers, monsieur, for methinks I am marvellous hairy about the
face; and I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I must
scratch.
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?
I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let us have the tongs and the
bones.
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
Truly, a peck of provender; I could munch your good dry oats. Methinks
I have a great desire to a bottle of hay: good hay, sweet hay, hath no
fellow.
I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
The squirrels hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.
I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But, I pray you, let
none of your people stir me; I have an exposition of sleep come upon
me.
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.
Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Gently entwist, the female ivy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
O, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!
 
 Oberon advances. Enter Puck.
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity.
For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her and fall out with her:
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
Stood now within the pretty flouriets eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms beggd my patience,
I then did ask of her her changeling child;
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in fairyland.
And now I have the boy, I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformd scalp
From off the head of this Athenian swain,
That he awaking when the other do,
May all to Athens back again repair,
And think no more of this nights accidents
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
 
    Be as thou wast wont to be;
    See as thou was wont to see.
    Dians bud oer Cupids flower
    Hath such force and blessed power.
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Methought I was enamourd of an ass.
There lies your love.
How came these things to pass?
O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
Silence awhile.Robin, take off this head.
Titania, music call; and strike more dead
Than common sleep, of all these five the sense.
Music, ho, music, such as charmeth sleep.
Now when thou wakst, with thine own fools eyes peep.
Sound, music.
 
Come, my queen, take hands with me,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly
Dance in Duke Theseus house triumphantly,
And bless it to all fair prosperity:
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.
    Fairy king, attend and mark.
    I do hear the morning lark.
    Then, my queen, in silence sad,
    Trip we after nights shade.
    We the globe can compass soon,
    Swifter than the wandring moon.
    Come, my lord, and in our flight,
    Tell me how it came this night
    That I sleeping here was found
    With these mortals on the ground.
 
Go, one of you, find out the forester;
For now our observation is performd;
And since we have the vaward of the day,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
Dispatch I say, and find the forester.
 
We will, fair queen, up to the mountains top,
And mark the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in a wood of Crete they bayd the bear
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear
Such gallant chiding; for, besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near
Seemd all one mutual cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flewd, so sanded; and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
Crook-kneed and dewlapd like Thessalian bulls;
Slow in pursuit, but matchd in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A cry more tuneable
Was never hollad to, nor cheerd with horn,
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
Judge when you hear.But, soft, what nymphs are these?
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander; this Demetrius is;
This Helena, old Nedars Helena:
I wonder of their being here together.
No doubt they rose up early to observe
The rite of May; and, hearing our intent,
Came here in grace of our solemnity.
But speak, Egeus; is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
It is, my lord.
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
 Horns, and shout within. Demetrius, Lysander, Hermia and Helena wake
 and start up.
Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past.
Begin these wood-birds but to couple now?
Pardon, my lord.
 He and the rest kneel to  Theseus.
I pray you all, stand up.
I know you two are rival enemies.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
That hatred is so far from jealousy
To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity?
My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
Half sleep, half waking; but as yet, I swear,
I cannot truly say how I came here.
But, as I think (for truly would I speak)
And now I do bethink me, so it is:
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might be,
Without the peril of the Athenian law.
Enough, enough, my lord; you have enough.
I beg the law, the law upon his head.
They would have stoln away, they would, Demetrius,
Thereby to have defeated you and me:
You of your wife, and me of my consent,
Of my consent that she should be your wife.
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither to this wood;
And I in fury hither followd them,
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power,
(But by some power it is) my love to Hermia,
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Which in my childhood I did dote upon;
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betrothd ere I saw Hermia.
But like a sickness did I loathe this food.
But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will for evermore be true to it.
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met.
Of this discourse we more will hear anon.
Egeus, I will overbear your will;
For in the temple, by and by with us,
These couples shall eternally be knit.
And, for the morning now is something worn,
Our purposd hunting shall be set aside.
Away with us to Athens. Three and three,
Well hold a feast in great solemnity.
Come, Hippolyta.

These things seem small and undistinguishable,
Like far-off mountains turnd into clouds.
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
When everything seems double.
So methinks.
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
Mine own, and not mine own.
Are you sure
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here, and bid us follow him?
Yea, and my father.
And Hippolyta.
And he did bid us follow to the temple.
Why, then, we are awake: lets follow him,
And by the way let us recount our dreams.
 
 When my cue comes, call me, and I will answer. My next is
Most fair Pyramus. Heigh-ho! Peter Quince! Flute, the bellows-mender!
Snout, the tinker! Starveling! Gods my life! Stoln hence, and left me
asleep! I have had a most rare vision. I have had a dream, past the wit
of man to say what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about to
expound this dream. Methought I wasthere is no man can tell what.
Methought I was, and methought I hadbut man is but a patched fool if
he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not
heard, the ear of man hath not seen, mans hand is not able to taste,
his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was. I
will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream: it shall be
called Bottoms Dream, because it hath no bottom; and I will sing it
in the latter end of a play, before the Duke. Peradventure, to make it
the more gracious, I shall sing it at her death.
 
Have you sent to Bottoms house? Is he come home yet?
He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is transported.
If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes not forward, doth it?
It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able to discharge
Pyramus but he.
No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens.
Yea, and the best person too, and he is a very paramour for a sweet
voice.
You must say paragon. A paramour is, God bless us, a thing of naught.
SNUG
Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three
lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone forward, we had
all been made men.
O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life;
he could not have scaped sixpence a day. An the Duke had not given him
sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, Ill be hanged. He would have
deserved it: sixpence a day in Pyramus, or nothing.
Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?
Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!
Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not what; for if I tell
you, I am not true Athenian. I will tell you everything, right as it
fell out.
Let us hear, sweet Bottom.
Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, that the Duke hath
dined. Get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new
ribbons to your pumps; meet presently at the palace; every man look
oer his part. For the short and the long is, our play is preferred. In
any case, let Thisbe have clean linen; and let not him that plays the
lion pare his nails, for they shall hang out for the lions claws. And
breath; and I do not doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy.
No more words. Away! Go, away!
 
Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.
More strange than true. I never may believe
These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold;
That is the madman: the lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helens beauty in a brow of Egypt:
The poets eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven;
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poets pen
Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
Such tricks hath strong imagination,
That if it would but apprehend some joy,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a bear?
But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigurd so together,
More witnesseth than fancys images,
And grows to something of great constancy;
But, howsoever, strange and admirable.
Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.
Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts!
More than to us
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
Come now; what masques, what dances shall we have,
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our after-supper and bed-time?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand? Is there no play
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.
Here, mighty Theseus.
Say, what abridgment have you for this evening?
What masque? What music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time, if not with some delight?
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your Highness will see first.
 
 The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.
Well none of that. That have I told my love
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage?
That is an old device, and it was playd
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
The thrice three Muses mourning for the death
Of learning, late deceasd in beggary.
That is some satire, keen and critical,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
And his love Thisbe; very tragical mirth.
Merry and tragical? Tedious and brief?
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow.
How shall we find the concord of this discord?
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long,
Which is as brief as I have known a play;
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it tedious. For in all the play
There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, it is.
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself,
Which, when I saw rehearsd, I must confess,
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed.
What are they that do play it?
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
Which never labourd in their minds till now;
And now have toild their unbreathd memories
With this same play against your nuptial.
And we will hear it.
No, my noble lord,
It is not for you: I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world;
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretchd and connd with cruel pain
To do you service.
I will hear that play;
For never anything can be amiss
When simpleness and duty tender it.
Go, bring them in: and take your places, ladies.
 
I love not to see wretchedness oercharged,
And duty in his service perishing.
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
He says they can do nothing in this kind.
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake:
And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes;
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midst of sentences,
And, in conclusion, dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
Out of this silence yet I pickd a welcome;
And in the modesty of fearful duty
I read as much as from the rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
In least speak most to my capacity.
So please your grace, the Prologue is addressd.
Let him approach.
 Flourish of trumpets. Enter the Prologue.
PROLOGUE
If we offend, it is with our good will.
That you should think, we come not to offend,
But with good will.  To show our simple skill,
That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider then, we come but in despite.
We do not come, as minding to content you,
Our true intent is.  All for your delight
We are not here.  That you should here repent you,
You shall know all that you are like to know.
This fellow doth not stand upon points.
He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt; he knows not the stop. A
good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but to speak true.
Indeed he hath played on this prologue like a child on a recorder; a
sound, but not in government.
His speech was like a tangled chain; nothing impaired, but all
disordered. Who is next?
PROLOGUE
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show;
But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know;
This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain.
This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present
Wall, that vile wall which did these lovers sunder;
And through Walls chink, poor souls, they are content
To whisper, at the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lanthern, dog, and bush of thorn,
Presenteth Moonshine, for, if you will know,
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
To meet at Ninus tomb, there, there to woo.
This grisly beast (which Lion hight by name)
The trusty Thisbe, coming first by night,
Did scare away, or rather did affright;
And as she fled, her mantle she did fall;
Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth, and tall,
And finds his trusty Thisbes mantle slain;
Whereat with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
He bravely broachd his boiling bloody breast;
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,
His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain,
At large discourse while here they do remain.
I wonder if the lion be to speak.
No wonder, my lord. One lion may, when many asses do.
In this same interlude it doth befall
That I, one Snout by name, present a wall:
And such a wall as I would have you think
That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often very secretly.
This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone, doth show
That I am that same wall; the truth is so:
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?
It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse, my lord.
Pyramus draws near the wall; silence.
O grim-lookd night! O night with hue so black!
O night, which ever art when day is not!
O night, O night, alack, alack, alack,
I fear my Thisbes promise is forgot!
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
That standst between her fathers ground and mine;
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eyne.
 
Thanks, courteous wall: Jove shield thee well for this!
But what see I? No Thisbe do I see.
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
Cursd be thy stones for thus deceiving me!
The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.
No, in truth, sir, he should not. Deceiving me is Thisbes cue: she
is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall. You shall see it
will fall pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans,
For parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My cherry lips have often kissd thy stones,
Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.
I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
To spy an I can hear my Thisbes face.
Thisbe?
My love thou art, my love I think.
Think what thou wilt, I am thy lovers grace;
And like Limander am I trusty still.
And I like Helen, till the fates me kill.
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
I kiss the walls hole, not your lips at all.
Wilt thou at Ninnys tomb meet me straightway?
Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so;
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.

Now is the mural down between the two neighbours.
No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear without warning.
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
The best in this kind are but shadows; and the worst are no worse, if
imagination amend them.
It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.
If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves, they may pass
for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.
You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor,
May now, perchance, both quake and tremble here,
When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I, one Snug the joiner, am
A lion fell, nor else no lions dam;
For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, twere pity on my life.
A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.
The very best at a beast, my lord, that eer I saw.
This lion is a very fox for his valour.
True; and a goose for his discretion.
Not so, my lord, for his valour cannot carry his discretion, and the
fox carries the goose.
His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour; for the goose
carries not the fox. It is well; leave it to his discretion, and let us
listen to the moon.
This lanthorn doth the hornd moon present.
He should have worn the horns on his head.
He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the
circumference.
This lanthorn doth the hornd moon present;
Myself the man i the moon do seem to be.
This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man should be put into
the lantern. How is it else the man i the moon?
He dares not come there for the candle, for you see, it is already in
snuff.
I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change!
It appears by his small light of discretion that he is in the wane; but
yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.
Proceed, Moon.
All that I have to say, is to tell you that the lantern is the moon; I
the man i the moon; this thorn-bush my thorn-bush; and this dog my
dog.
Why, all these should be in the lantern, for all these are in the moon.
But silence; here comes Thisbe.
This is old Ninnys tomb. Where is my love?
Oh!

Well roared, Lion.
Well run, Thisbe.
Well shone, Moon. Truly, the moon shines with a good grace.

Well moused, Lion.
And then came Pyramus.
And so the lion vanished.
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams;
I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright;
For, by thy gracious golden, glittering gleams,
I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.
             But stay! O spite!
             But mark, poor knight,
         What dreadful dole is here!
             Eyes, do you see?
             How can it be?
         O dainty duck! O dear!
             Thy mantle good,
             What, stained with blood?
         Approach, ye Furies fell!
             O Fates, come, come;
             Cut thread and thrum;
         Quail, rush, conclude, and quell!
This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go near to make a
man look sad.
Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.
O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame,
Since lion vile hath here deflowerd my dear?
Which isno, nowhich was the fairest dame
That livd, that lovd, that likd, that lookd with cheer.
             Come, tears, confound!
             Out, sword, and wound
         The pap of Pyramus;
             Ay, that left pap,
             Where heart doth hop:
         Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
             Now am I dead,
             Now am I fled;
         My soul is in the sky.
             Tongue, lose thy light!
             Moon, take thy flight!
         Now die, die, die, die, die.
 
No die, but an ace, for him; for he is but one.
Less than an ace, man; for he is dead, he is nothing.
With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and prove an ass.
How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes back and finds her
lover?
She will find him by starlight.
Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.
Methinks she should not use a long one for such a Pyramus. I hope she
will be brief.
A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe, is the
better: he for a man, God warrant us; she for a woman, God bless us!
She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.
And thus she means, _videlicet_
             Asleep, my love?
             What, dead, my dove?
         O Pyramus, arise,
             Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
             Dead, dead? A tomb
         Must cover thy sweet eyes.
             These lily lips,
             This cherry nose,
         These yellow cowslip cheeks,
             Are gone, are gone!
             Lovers, make moan;
         His eyes were green as leeks.
             O Sisters Three,
             Come, come to me,
         With hands as pale as milk;
             Lay them in gore,
             Since you have shore
         With shears his thread of silk.
             Tongue, not a word:
             Come, trusty sword,
         Come, blade, my breast imbrue;
             And farewell, friends.
             Thus Thisbe ends.
         Adieu, adieu, adieu.
 
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
Ay, and Wall too.
No, I assure you; the wall is down that parted their fathers. Will it
please you to see the epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between
two of our company?
No epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no excuse. Never excuse;
for when the players are all dead there need none to be blamed. Marry,
if he that writ it had played Pyramus, and hanged himself in Thisbes
garter, it would have been a fine tragedy; and so it is, truly; and
very notably discharged. But come, your Bergomask; let your epilogue
alone.
 
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers, to bed; tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn
As much as we this night have overwatchd.
This palpable-gross play hath well beguild
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
A fortnight hold we this solemnity
In nightly revels and new jollity.
 
   Now the hungry lion roars,
      And the wolf behowls the moon;
   Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
      All with weary task fordone.
   Now the wasted brands do glow,
      Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
   Puts the wretch that lies in woe
      In remembrance of a shroud.
   Now it is the time of night
      That the graves, all gaping wide,
   Every one lets forth his sprite,
      In the church-way paths to glide.
   And we fairies, that do run
      By the triple Hecates team
   From the presence of the sun,
      Following darkness like a dream,
   Now are frolic; not a mouse
      Shall disturb this hallowd house.
   I am sent with broom before,
      To sweep the dust behind the door.
   Through the house give glimmering light,
        By the dead and drowsy fire.
   Every elf and fairy sprite
        Hop as light as bird from brier,
   And this ditty after me,
   Sing and dance it trippingly.
   First rehearse your song by rote,
        To each word a warbling note;
   Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
   Will we sing, and bless this place.
 
   Now, until the break of day,
   Through this house each fairy stray.
   To the best bride-bed will we,
   Which by us shall blessd be;
   And the issue there create
   Ever shall be fortunate.
   So shall all the couples three
   Ever true in loving be;
   And the blots of Natures hand
   Shall not in their issue stand:
   Never mole, hare-lip, nor scar,
   Nor mark prodigious, such as are
   Despised in nativity,
   Shall upon their children be.
   With this field-dew consecrate,
   Every fairy take his gait,
   And each several chamber bless,
   Through this palace, with sweet peace;
   And the owner of it blest.
   Ever shall it in safety rest,
   Trip away. Make no stay;
   Meet me all by break of day.
   If we shadows have offended,
   Think but this, and all is mended,
   That you have but slumberd here
   While these visions did appear.
   And this weak and idle theme,
   No more yielding but a dream,
   Gentles, do not reprehend.
   If you pardon, we will mend.
   And, as I am an honest Puck,
   If we have unearnd luck
   Now to scape the serpents tongue,
   We will make amends ere long;
   Else the Puck a liar call.
   So, good night unto you all.
   Give me your hands, if we be friends,
   And Robin shall restore amends.
Whos there?
Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Long live the King!
Barnardo?
He.
You come most carefully upon your hour.
Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
For this relief much thanks. Tis bitter cold, And I am sick
at heart.
Have you had quiet guard?
Not a mouse stirring.
Well, good night. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The
rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
Friends to this ground.
And liegemen to the Dane.
Give you good night.
O, farewell, honest soldier, who hath relievd you?
Barnardo has my place. Give you good-night.
 
Holla, Barnardo!
Say, what, is Horatio there?
A piece of him.
Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.
What, has this thing appeard again tonight?
I have seen nothing.
Horatio says tis but our fantasy, And will not let belief
take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of
this night, That if again this apparition come He may approve our eyes
and speak to it.
Tush, tush, twill not appear.
Sit down awhile, And let us once again assail your ears, That
are so fortified against our story, What we two nights have seen.
Well, sit we down, And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.
Last night of all, When yond same star thats westward from
the pole, Had made his course tillume that part of heaven Where now it
burns, Marcellus and myself, The bell then beating one
Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again.
In the same figure, like the King thats dead.
Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.
Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.
Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
BARNARDO It would be spoke to.
Question it, Horatio.
What art thou that usurpst this time of night, Together with
that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did
sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak.
It is offended.
See, it stalks away.
Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
 
Tis gone, and will not answer.
How now, Horatio! You tremble and look pale. Is not this
something more than fantasy? What think you ont?
Before my God, I might not this believe Without the sensible
and true avouch Of mine own eyes.
Is it not like the King?
As thou art to thyself: Such was the very armour he had on
When he thambitious Norway combated; So frownd he once, when in an
angry parle He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. Tis strange.
Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial
stalk hath he gone by our watch.
In what particular thought to work I know not; But in the
gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our
state.
Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows, Why this
same strict and most observant watch So nightly toils the subject of
the land, And why such daily cast of brazen cannon And foreign mart for
implements of war; Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week. What might be toward, that
this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day: Who
ist that can inform me?
That can I; At least, the whisper goes so. Our last King,
Whose image even but now appeard to us, Was, as you know, by
Fortinbras of Norway, Thereto prickd on by a most emulate pride, Dard
to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet, For so this side of our
known world esteemd him, Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seald
all those his lands Which he stood seizd of, to the conqueror; Against
the which, a moiety competent Was gaged by our King; which had returnd
To the inheritance of Fortinbras, Had he been vanquisher; as by the
same covnant And carriage of the article designd, His fell to Hamlet.
Now, sir, young Fortinbras, Of unimproved mettle, hot and full, Hath in
the skirts of Norway, here and there, Sharkd up a list of lawless
resolutes, For food and diet, to some enterprise That hath a stomach
int; which is no other, As it doth well appear unto our state, But to
recover of us by strong hand And terms compulsatory, those foresaid
lands So by his father lost. And this, I take it, Is the main motive of
our preparations, The source of this our watch, and the chief head Of
this post-haste and rummage in the land.
I think it be no other but een so: Well may it sort that
this portentous figure Comes armed through our watch so like the King
That was and is the question of these wars.
A mote it is to trouble the minds eye. In the most high and
palmy state of Rome, A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, The graves
stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the
Roman streets; As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star, Upon whose influence
Neptunes empire stands, Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. And
even the like precurse of fierce events, As harbingers preceding still
the fates And prologue to the omen coming on, Have heaven and earth
together demonstrated Unto our climatures and countrymen.
 Re-enter Ghost.
But, soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again! Ill cross it, though it
blast me. Stay, illusion! If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done, That may to thee do
ease, and grace to me, Speak to me. If thou art privy to thy countrys
fate, Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O speak! Or if thou hast
uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, For
which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, Speak of it. Stay, and
speak!
 
Stop it, Marcellus!
Shall I strike at it with my partisan?
Do, if it will not stand.
Tis here!
Tis here!
 
Tis gone! We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it
the show of violence, For it is as the air, invulnerable, And our vain
blows malicious mockery.
It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
And then it started, like a guilty thing Upon a fearful
summons. I have heard The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, Doth
with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat Awake the god of day; and at
his warning, Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, Thextravagant
and erring spirit hies To his confine. And of the truth herein This
present object made probation.
It faded on the crowing of the cock. Some say that ever
gainst that season comes Wherein our Saviours birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning singeth all night long; And then, they say, no
spirit dare stir abroad, The nights are wholesome, then no planets
strike, No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm; So hallowd and
so gracious is the time.
So have I heard, and do in part believe it. But look, the morn
in russet mantle clad, Walks oer the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up, and by my advice, Let us impart what we have
seen tonight Unto young Hamlet; for upon my life, This spirit, dumb to
us, will speak to him. Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As
needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Lets dot, I pray, and I this morning know Where we shall
find him most conveniently.
 
 Laertes, Voltemand, Cornelius, Lords and Attendant.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear brothers death The memory be
green, and that it us befitted To bear our hearts in grief, and our
discretion fought with nature That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Together with remembrance of ourselves. Therefore our sometime sister,
now our queen, Thimperial jointress to this warlike state, Have we, as
twere with a defeated joy, With one auspicious and one dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, In equal scale
weighing delight and dole, Taken to wife; nor have we herein barrd
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone With this affair along. For
all, our thanks. Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras, Holding a
weak supposal of our worth, Or thinking by our late dear brothers
death Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, Colleagued with this
dream of his advantage, He hath not faild to pester us with message,
Importing the surrender of those lands Lost by his father, with all
bonds of law, To our most valiant brother. So much for him. Now for
ourself and for this time of meeting: Thus much the business is: we
have here writ To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras, Who, impotent and
bed-rid, scarcely hears Of this his nephews purpose, to suppress His
further gait herein; in that the levies, The lists, and full
proportions are all made Out of his subject: and we here dispatch You,
good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand, For bearers of this greeting to old
Norway, Giving to you no further personal power To business with the
King, more than the scope Of these dilated articles allow. Farewell;
and let your haste commend your duty.
In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.
 
And now, Laertes, whats the news with you? You told us of some suit.
What ist, Laertes? You cannot speak of reason to the Dane, And lose
your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes, That shall not be my offer,
not thy asking? The head is not more native to the heart, The hand more
instrumental to the mouth, Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
Dread my lord, Your leave and favour to return to France, From
whence though willingly I came to Denmark To show my duty in your
coronation; Yet now I must confess, that duty done, My thoughts and
wishes bend again toward France, And bow them to your gracious leave
and pardon.
Have you your fathers leave? What says Polonius?
He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave By laboursome
petition; and at last Upon his will I seald my hard consent. I do
beseech you give him leave to go.
Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine, And thy best graces
spend it at thy will! But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son
 A little more than kin, and less than kind.
How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Not so, my lord, I am too much i the sun.
Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look
like a friend on Denmark. Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for
thy noble father in the dust. Thou knowst tis common, all that lives
must die, Passing through nature to eternity.
Ay, madam, it is common.
If it be, Why seems it so particular with thee?
Seems, madam! Nay, it is; I know not seems. Tis not alone my
inky cloak, good mother, Nor customary suits of solemn black, Nor windy
suspiration of forcd breath, No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected haviour of the visage, Together with all forms, moods,
shows of grief, That can denote me truly. These indeed seem, For they
show; These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet, To give these
mourning duties to your father; But you must know, your father lost a
father, That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound In filial
obligation, for some term To do obsequious sorrow. But to persevere In
obstinate condolement is a course Of impious stubbornness. Tis unmanly
grief, It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, A heart unfortified, a
mind impatient, An understanding simple and unschoold; For what we
know must be, and is as common As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition Take it to heart? Fie, tis a
fault to heaven, A fault against the dead, a fault to nature, To reason
most absurd, whose common theme Is death of fathers, and who still hath
cried, From the first corse till he that died today, This must be so.
We pray you throw to earth This unprevailing woe, and think of us As of
a father; for let the world take note You are the most immediate to our
throne, And with no less nobility of love Than that which dearest
father bears his son Do I impart toward you. For your intent In going
back to school in Wittenberg, It is most retrograde to our desire: And
we beseech you bend you to remain Here in the cheer and comfort of our
eye, Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet. I pray thee stay
with us; go not to Wittenberg.
I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
Why, tis a loving and a fair reply. Be as ourself in Denmark.
Madam, come; This gentle and unforcd accord of Hamlet Sits smiling to
my heart; in grace whereof, No jocund health that Denmark drinks today
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, And the Kings rouse the
heaven shall bruit again, Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.
 
O that this too too solid flesh would melt, Thaw, and resolve
itself into a dew! Or that the Everlasting had not fixd His canon
gainst self-slaughter. O God! O God! How weary, stale, flat, and
unprofitable Seem to me all the uses of this world! Fie ont! Oh fie!
tis an unweeded garden That grows to seed; things rank and gross in
nature Possess it merely. That it should come to this! But two months
deadnay, not so much, not two: So excellent a king; that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother, That he might not beteem
the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth! Must
I remember? Why, she would hang on him As if increase of appetite had
grown By what it fed on; and yet, within a month Let me not think
ontFrailty, thy name is woman! A little month, or ere those shoes
were old With which she followed my poor fathers body Like Niobe, all
tears.Why she, even she O God! A beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mournd longer,married with mine uncle, My fathers
brother; but no more like my father Than I to Hercules. Within a month?
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her
galled eyes, She married. O most wicked speed, to post With such
dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Hail to your lordship!
I am glad to see you well: Horatio, or I do forget myself.
The same, my lord, And your poor servant ever.
Sir, my good friend; Ill change that name with you: And what
make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?
My good lord.
I am very glad to see you.Good even, sir. But what, in faith,
make you from Wittenberg?
A truant disposition, good my lord.
I would not hear your enemy say so; Nor shall you do my ear
that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself.
I know you are no truant. But what is your affair in Elsinore? Well
teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
My lord, I came to see your fathers funeral.
I prithee do not mock me, fellow-student. I think it was to see
my mothers wedding.
Indeed, my lord, it followd hard upon.
Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bakd meats Did coldly
furnish forth the marriage tables. Would I had met my dearest foe in
heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio. My father,methinks I see
my father.
Where, my lord?
In my minds eye, Horatio.
I saw him once; he was a goodly king.
He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon
his like again.
My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
Saw? Who?
My lord, the King your father.
The King my father!
Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear, till I
may deliver Upon the witness of these gentlemen This marvel to you.
For Gods love let me hear.
Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and
Barnardo, on their watch In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encounterd. A figure like your father, Armed at point
slow and stately by them: thrice he walkd By their oppressd and
fear-surprised eyes, Within his truncheons length; whilst they,
not to him. This to me In dreadful secrecy impart they did, And I with
them the third night kept the watch, Where, as they had deliverd, both
in time, Form of the thing, each word made true and good, The
apparition comes. I knew your father; These hands are not more like.
But where was this?
My lord, upon the platform where we watch.
Did you not speak to it?
My lord, I did; But answer made it none: yet once methought It
lifted up it head, and did address Itself to motion, like as it would
speak. But even then the morning cock crew loud, And at the sound it
shrunk in haste away, And vanishd from our sight.
Tis very strange.
As I do live, my honourd lord, tis true; And we did think it
writ down in our duty To let you know of it.
Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me. Hold you the watch
tonight?
Mar. and BARNARDO. We do, my lord.
Armd, say you?
Both. Armd, my lord.
From top to toe?
My lord, from head to foot.
Then saw you not his face?
O yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.
What, lookd he frowningly?
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Pale, or red?
Nay, very pale.
And fixd his eyes upon you?
Most constantly.
I would I had been there.
It would have much amazd you.
Very like, very like. Stayd it long?
While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
Longer, longer.
Not when I sawt.
His beard was grizzled, no?
It was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silverd.
I will watch tonight; Perchance twill walk again.
I warrant you it will.
If it assume my noble fathers person, Ill speak to it, though
hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, If
you have hitherto conceald this sight, Let it be tenable in your
silence still; And whatsoever else shall hap tonight, Give it an
understanding, but no tongue. I will requite your loves. So, fare ye
well. Upon the platform twixt eleven and twelve, Ill visit you.
Our duty to your honour.
Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.
My fathers spirit in arms! All is not well; I doubt some foul play:
would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds
will rise, Though all the earth oerwhelm them, to mens eyes.
 
My necessaries are embarkd. Farewell. And, sister, as the
winds give benefit And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, But let me
hear from you.
Do you doubt that?
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour, Hold it a fashion
and a toy in blood; A violet in the youth of primy nature, Forward, not
permanent, sweet, not lasting; The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
No more.
No more but so?
Think it no more. For nature crescent does not grow alone In
thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes, The inward service of the
mind and soul Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now, And now no
soil nor cautel doth besmirch The virtue of his will; but you must
fear, His greatness weighd, his will is not his own; For he himself is
subject to his birth: He may not, as unvalud persons do, Carve for
himself; for on his choice depends The sanctity and health of this
whole state; And therefore must his choice be circumscribd Unto the
voice and yielding of that body Whereof he is the head. Then if he says
he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. Then weigh what loss your
honour may sustain If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose
your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmasterd importunity.
Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister; And keep you in the rear of
your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire. The chariest maid
is prodigal enough If she unmask her beauty to the moon. Virtue itself
scopes not calumnious strokes: The canker galls the infants of the
spring Too oft before their buttons be disclosd, And in the morn and
liquid dew of youth Contagious blastments are most imminent. Be wary
then, best safety lies in fear. Youth to itself rebels, though none
else near.
I shall theffect of this good lesson keep As watchman to my
heart. But good my brother, Do not as some ungracious pastors do, Show
me the steep and thorny way to heaven; Whilst like a puffd and
reckless libertine Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads, And
recks not his own rede.
O, fear me not. I stay too long. But here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace; Occasion smiles upon a second
leave.
Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame. The wind sits
in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stayd for. There, my
blessing with you.

And these few precepts in thy memory Look thou character. Give thy
thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportiond thought his act. Be thou
familiar, but by no means vulgar. Those friends thou hast, and their
adoption tried, Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel; But do
not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatchd, unfledgd
comrade. Beware Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in, Beart that
thopposed may beware of thee. Give every man thine ear, but few thy
voice: Take each mans censure, but reserve thy judgment. Costly thy
habit as thy purse can buy, But not expressd in fancy; rich, not
gaudy: For the apparel oft proclaims the man; And they in France of the
best rank and station Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be: For loan oft loses both itself and
friend; And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. This above all: to
thine own self be true; And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou
canst not then be false to any man. Farewell: my blessing season this
in thee.
Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.
The time invites you; go, your servants tend.
Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well What I have said to you.
Tis in my memory lockd, And you yourself shall keep the key
of it.
Farewell.
 
What ist, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.
Marry, well bethought: Tis told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you; and you yourself Have of your audience been
most free and bounteous. If it be so,as so tis put on me, And that in
way of caution,I must tell you You do not understand yourself so
clearly As it behoves my daughter and your honour. What is between you?
Give me up the truth.
He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders Of his affection
to me.
Affection! Pooh! You speak like a green girl, Unsifted in
such perilous circumstance. Do you believe his tenders, as you call
them?
I do not know, my lord, what I should think.
Marry, Ill teach you; think yourself a baby; That you have
taen these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling. Tender
yourself more dearly; Or,not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
Roaming it thus,youll tender me a fool.
My lord, he hath importund me with love In honourable
fashion.
Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.
And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, With almost
all the holy vows of heaven.
Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know, When the blood
burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows: these blazes,
daughter, Giving more light than heat, extinct in both, Even in their
promise, as it is a-making, You must not take for fire. From this time
Be something scanter of your maiden presence; Set your entreatments at
a higher rate Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, Believe so
much in him that he is young; And with a larger tether may he walk Than
may be given you. In few, Ophelia, Do not believe his vows; for they
are brokers, Not of that dye which their investments show, But mere
implorators of unholy suits, Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
The better to beguile. This is for all. I would not, in plain terms,
from this time forth Have you so slander any moment leisure As to give
words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. Look tot, I charge you; come your
ways.
I shall obey, my lord.
 
The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
It is a nipping and an eager air.
What hour now?
I think it lacks of twelve.
No, it is struck.
Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season Wherein
the spirit held his wont to walk.
What does this mean, my lord?
The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, Keeps wassail,
and the swaggering upspring reels; And as he drains his draughts of
Rhenish down, The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out The triumph of
his pledge.
Is it a custom?
Ay marry ist; And to my mind, though I am native here, And to
the manner born, it is a custom More honourd in the breach than the
observance. This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traducd and
taxd of other nations: They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish
phrase Soil our addition; and indeed it takes From our achievements,
though performd at height, The pith and marrow of our attribute. So
oft it chances in particular men That for some vicious mole of nature
in them, As in their birth, wherein they are not guilty, Since nature
cannot choose his origin, By their oergrowth of some complexion, Oft
breaking down the pales and forts of reason; Or by some habit, that too
much oerleavens The form of plausive manners;that these men,
Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, Being Natures livery or
Fortunes star, His virtues else,be they as pure as grace, As
infinite as man may undergo, Shall in the general censure take
corruption From that particular fault. The dram of evil Doth all the
noble substance often doubt To his own scandal.
Look, my lord, it comes!
Angels and ministers of grace defend us! Be thou a spirit of
health or goblin damnd, Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts
from hell, Be thy intents wicked or charitable, Thou comst in such a
questionable shape That I will speak to thee. Ill call thee Hamlet,
King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me! Let me not burst in ignorance;
but tell Why thy canonizd bones, hearsed in death, Have burst their
cerements; why the sepulchre, Wherein we saw thee quietly inurnd, Hath
opd his ponderous and marble jaws To cast thee up again! What may this
mean, That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel, Revisitst thus
the glimpses of the moon, Making night hideous, and we fools of nature
So horridly to shake our disposition With thoughts beyond the reaches
of our souls? Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
 
It beckons you to go away with it, As if it some impartment
did desire To you alone.
removed ground. But do not go with it.
No, by no means.
It will not speak; then will I follow it.
Do not, my lord.
Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life at a pins
fee; And for my soul, what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as
itself? It waves me forth again. Ill follow it.
What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, Or to the
dreadful summit of the cliff That beetles oer his base into the sea,
And there assume some other horrible form Which might deprive your
sovereignty of reason, And draw you into madness? Think of it. The very
place puts toys of desperation, Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fadoms to the sea And hears it roar beneath.
It waves me still. Go on, Ill follow thee.
You shall not go, my lord.
Hold off your hands.
Be ruld; you shall not go.
My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As
hardy as the Nemean lions nerve.
 
Still am I calld. Unhand me, gentlemen.
 
By heaven, Ill make a ghost of him that lets me. I say, away!Go on,
Ill follow thee.
 
He waxes desperate with imagination.
Lets follow; tis not fit thus to obey him.
Have after. To what issue will this come?
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
Heaven will direct it.
Nay, lets follow him.
 
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, Ill go no further.
Mark me.
I will.
My hour is almost come, When I to sulphrous and tormenting
flames Must render up myself.
Alas, poor ghost!
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I shall
unfold.
Speak, I am bound to hear.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
What?
I am thy fathers spirit, Doomd for a certain term to walk the
night, And for the day confind to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes
done in my days of nature Are burnt and purgd away. But that I am
forbid To tell the secrets of my prison-house, I could a tale unfold
whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres, Thy knotted and
combined locks to part, And each particular hair to stand on end Like
quills upon the fretful porcupine. But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list! If thou didst ever thy
dear father love
O God!
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
Murder!
Murder most foul, as in the best it is; But this most foul,
strange, and unnatural.
Haste me to knowt, that I, with wings as swift As meditation
or the thoughts of love May sweep to my revenge.
I find thee apt; And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.
Now, Hamlet, hear. Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard, A
serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark Is by a forged process of
my death Rankly abusd; but know, thou noble youth, The serpent that
did sting thy fathers life Now wears his crown.
O my prophetic soul! Mine uncle!
Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, With witchcraft of
his wit, with traitorous gifts, O wicked wit, and gifts, that have the
power So to seduce!won to his shameful lust The will of my most
seeming-virtuous queen. O Hamlet, what a falling off was there, From
me, whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with
the vow I made to her in marriage; and to decline Upon a wretch whose
natural gifts were poor To those of mine. But virtue, as it never will
be movd, Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven; So lust,
though to a radiant angel linkd, Will sate itself in a celestial bed
And prey on garbage. But soft! methinks I scent the morning air; Brief
let me be. Sleeping within my orchard, My custom always of the
afternoon, Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole With juice of cursed
hebenon in a vial, And in the porches of my ears did pour The leperous
distilment, whose effect Holds such an enmity with blood of man That
swift as quicksilver it courses through The natural gates and alleys of
the body; And with a sudden vigour it doth posset And curd, like eager
droppings into milk, The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine; And
a most instant tetter barkd about, Most lazar-like, with vile and
loathsome crust All my smooth body. Thus was I, sleeping, by a
brothers hand, Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatchd: Cut off
even in the blossoms of my sin, Unhousled, disappointed, unaneld; No
reckoning made, but sent to my account With all my imperfections on my
head. O horrible! O horrible! most horrible! If thou hast nature in
thee, bear it not; Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for
not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught; leave
her to heaven, And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick
and sting her. Fare thee well at once! The glow-worm shows the matin to
be near, And gins to pale his uneffectual fire. Adieu, adieu, adieu.
Hamlet, remember me.
 
O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else? And shall I
couple hell? O, fie! Hold, my heart; And you, my sinews, grow not
instant old, But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee? Ay, thou poor
thee? Yea, from the table of my memory Ill wipe away all trivial fond
records, All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, That youth
and observation copied there; And thy commandment all alone shall live
Within the book and volume of my brain, Unmixd with baser matter. Yes,
by heaven! O most pernicious woman! O villain, villain, smiling damned
villain! My tables. Meet it is I set it down, That one may smile, and
smile, and be a villain! At least I am sure it may be so in Denmark.
 
So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word; It is Adieu, adieu, remember
me. I have swornt.
My lord, my lord.
 Lord Hamlet.
 Heaven secure him.
So be it!
 Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
How ist, my noble lord?
What news, my lord?
O, wonderful!
Good my lord, tell it.
No, youll reveal it.
Not I, my lord, by heaven.
Nor I, my lord.
How say you then, would heart of man once think it? But youll
be secret?
Ay, by heaven, my lord.
Theres neer a villain dwelling in all Denmark But hes an
arrant knave.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave To tell us
this.
Why, right; you are i the right; And so, without more
circumstance at all, I hold it fit that we shake hands and part: You,
as your business and desires shall point you, For every man hath
business and desire, Such as it is;and for my own poor part, Look you,
Ill go pray.
These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
Im sorry they offend you, heartily; Yes faith, heartily.
Theres no offence, my lord.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offence
too. Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell
you. For your desire to know what is between us, Oermastert as you
may. And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
Give me one poor request.
What ist, my lord? We will.
Never make known what you have seen tonight.
My lord, we will not.
Nay, but sweart.
In faith, my lord, not I.
Nor I, my lord, in faith.
Upon my sword.
We have sworn, my lord, already.
Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
 Swear.
Ha, ha boy, sayst thou so? Art thou there, truepenny? Come on,
you hear this fellow in the cellarage. Consent to swear.
Propose the oath, my lord.
Never to speak of this that you have seen. Swear by my sword.
 Swear.
_Hic et ubique?_ Then well shift our ground. Come hither,
gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword. Never to speak of
this that you have heard. Swear by my sword.
 Swear.
Well said, old mole! Canst work i thearth so fast? A worthy
pioner! Once more remove, good friends.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange.
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. There are more
things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your
philosophy. But come, Here, as before, never, so help you mercy, How
strange or odd soeer I bear myself, As I perchance hereafter shall
think meet To put an antic disposition on That you, at such times
seeing me, never shall, With arms encumberd thus, or this head-shake,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, As Well, we know, or We
could and if we would, Or If we list to speak; or There be and if
they might, Or such ambiguous giving out, to note That you know aught
of me:this not to do. So grace and mercy at your most need help you,
Swear.
 Swear.
Rest, rest, perturbed spirit. So, gentlemen, With all my love I
do commend me to you; And what so poor a man as Hamlet is May do
texpress his love and friending to you, God willing, shall not lack.
Let us go in together, And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. The
time is out of joint. O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it
right. Nay, come, lets go together.
 
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.
I will, my lord.
You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo, Before you
visit him, to make inquiry Of his behaviour.
My lord, I did intend it.
Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir, Enquire me
first what Danskers are in Paris; And how, and who, what means, and
where they keep, What company, at what expense; and finding By this
encompassment and drift of question, That they do know my son, come you
more nearer Than your particular demands will touch it. Take you as
twere some distant knowledge of him, As thus, I know his father and
his friends, And in part himdo you mark this, Reynaldo?
Ay, very well, my lord.
And in part him, but, you may say, not well; But ift be
he I mean, hes very wild; Addicted so and so; and there put on him
What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank As may dishonour him;
take heed of that; But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips As are
companions noted and most known To youth and liberty.
As gaming, my lord?
Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, Quarrelling, drabbing.
You may go so far.
My lord, that would dishonour him.
Faith no, as you may season it in the charge. You must not
put another scandal on him, That he is open to incontinency; Thats not
my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly That they may seem the
taints of liberty; The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness
in unreclaimed blood, Of general assault.
But my good lord
Wherefore should you do this?
Ay, my lord, I would know that.
Marry, sir, heres my drift, And I believe it is a fetch of
warrant. You laying these slight sullies on my son, As twere a thing a
little soild i th working, Mark you, Your party in converse, him you
would sound, Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes The youth you
breathe of guilty, be assurd He closes with you in this consequence;
Good sir, or so; or friend, or gentleman According to the phrase
or the addition Of man and country.
Very good, my lord.
And then, sir, does he this, He doesWhat was I about to
say? By the mass, I was about to say something. Where did I leave?
At closes in the consequence. At friend or so, and
gentleman.
At closes in the consequence ay, marry! He closes with you
thus: I know the gentleman, I saw him yesterday, or tother day, Or
then, or then, with such and such; and, as you say, There was he
gaming, there oertook ins rouse, There falling out at tennis: or
perchance, I saw him enter such a house of sale _Videlicet_, a
brothel, or so forth. See you now; Your bait of falsehood takes this
carp of truth; And thus do we of wisdom and of reach, With windlasses,
and with assays of bias, By indirections find directions out. So by my
former lecture and advice Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?
My lord, I have.
God b wi you, fare you well.
Good my lord.
Observe his inclination in yourself.
I shall, my lord.
And let him ply his music.
Well, my lord.
Farewell.
 
How now, Ophelia, whats the matter?
Alas, my lord, I have been so affrighted.
With what, in the name of God?
My lord, as I was sewing in my chamber, Lord Hamlet, with his
doublet all unbracd, No hat upon his head, his stockings fould,
Ungartred, and down-gyved to his ankle, Pale as his shirt, his knees
knocking each other, And with a look so piteous in purport As if he had
been loosed out of hell To speak of horrors, he comes before me.
Mad for thy love?
My lord, I do not know, but truly I do fear it.
What said he?
He took me by the wrist and held me hard; Then goes he to the
length of all his arm; And with his other hand thus oer his brow, He
falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it. Long stayd he
so, At last,a little shaking of mine arm, And thrice his head thus
waving up and down, He raisd a sigh so piteous and profound As it did
seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being. That done, he lets me
go, And with his head over his shoulder turnd He seemd to find his
way without his eyes, For out o doors he went without their help, And
to the last bended their light on me.
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King. This is the very
ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself, And leads the
will to desperate undertakings, As oft as any passion under heaven That
does afflict our natures. I am sorry, What, have you given him any
hard words of late?
No, my good lord; but as you did command, I did repel his
letters and denied His access to me.
That hath made him mad. I am sorry that with better heed and
judgment I had not quoted him. I feard he did but trifle, And meant to
wreck thee. But beshrew my jealousy! It seems it is as proper to our
age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the
younger sort To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King. This must be
known, which, being kept close, might move More grief to hide than hate
to utter love.
 
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Moreover that we much
did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty
sending. Something have you heard Of Hamlets transformation; so I call
it, Since nor thexterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was.
What it should be, More than his fathers death, that thus hath put him
So much from thunderstanding of himself, I cannot dream of. I entreat
you both That, being of so young days brought up with him, And since so
neighbourd to his youth and humour, That you vouchsafe your rest here
in our court Some little time, so by your companies To draw him on to
pleasures and to gather, So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus That, opend, lies within
our remedy.
Good gentlemen, he hath much talkd of you, And sure I am, two
men there are not living To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and good will As to expend your time with us
awhile, For the supply and profit of our hope, Your visitation shall
receive such thanks As fits a kings remembrance.
Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have
of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.
We both obey, And here give up ourselves, in the full
bent, To lay our service freely at your feet To be commanded.
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz. And I beseech you
instantly to visit My too much changed son. Go, some of you, And bring
these gentlemen where Hamlet is.
helpful to him.
Ay, amen.
Thambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully
returnd.
Thou still hast been the father of good news.
Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege, I hold my duty,
as I hold my soul, Both to my God and to my gracious King: And I do
think,or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath usd to dothat I have found The very cause of Hamlets
lunacy.
O speak of that, that do I long to hear.
Give first admittance to thambassadors; My news shall be the
fruit to that great feast.
Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
 
He tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath found The head and source of
all your sons distemper.
I doubt it is no other but the main, His fathers death and our
oerhasty marriage.
Well, we shall sift him.
Welcome, my good friends! Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
Most fair return of greetings and desires. Upon our first,
he sent out to suppress His nephews levies, which to him appeard To
be a preparation gainst the Polack; But better lookd into, he truly
found It was against your Highness; whereat grievd, That so his
sickness, age, and impotence Was falsely borne in hand, sends out
arrests On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys, Receives rebuke from
Norway; and in fine, Makes vow before his uncle never more To give
thassay of arms against your Majesty. Whereon old Norway, overcome
with joy, Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, And his
commission to employ those soldiers So levied as before, against the
Polack: With an entreaty, herein further shown,  That
it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this
enterprise, On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set
down.
It likes us well; And at our more considerd time well read,
Answer, and think upon this business. Meantime we thank you for your
well-took labour. Go to your rest, at night well feast together:. Most
welcome home.
 
This business is well ended. My liege and madam, to
expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night
night, and time is time. Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, And tediousness the limbs
and outward flourishes, I will be brief. Your noble son is mad. Mad
call I it; for to define true madness, What ist but to be nothing else
but mad? But let that go.
More matter, with less art.
Madam, I swear I use no art at all. That he is mad, tis
true: tis true tis pity; And pity tis tis true. A foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art. Mad let us grant him then. And
now remains That we find out the cause of this effect, Or rather say,
the cause of this defect, For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend, I have a
daughterhave whilst she is mine Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.  _To the
celestial, and my souls idol, the most beautified Ophelia_ Thats an
ill phrase, a vile phrase; beautified is a vile phrase: but you shall
hear.  _these; in her excellent white bosom, these, &c._
Came this from Hamlet to her?
Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful. 
_Doubt thou the stars are fire, Doubt that the sun doth move, Doubt
truth to be a liar, But never doubt I love. O dear Ophelia, I am ill at
these numbers. I have not art to reckon my groans. But that I love thee
best, O most best, believe it. Adieu. Thine evermore, most dear lady,
whilst this machine is to him, HAMLET._ This in obedience hath my
daughter showd me; And more above, hath his solicitings, As they fell
out by time, by means, and place, All given to mine ear.
But how hath she receivd his love?
What do you think of me?
As of a man faithful and honourable.
I would fain prove so. But what might you think, When I had
seen this hot love on the wing, As I perceivd it, I must tell you
that, Before my daughter told me, what might you, Or my dear Majesty
your queen here, think, If I had playd the desk or table-book, Or
given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, Or lookd upon this love with
idle sight, What might you think? No, I went round to work, And my
young mistress thus I did bespeak: Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy
star. This must not be. And then I precepts gave her, That she should
lock herself from his resort, Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice, And he, repulsed,a short
tale to make Fell into a sadness, then into a fast, Thence to a watch,
thence into a weakness, Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves, And all we wail for.
Do you think tis this?
It may be, very likely.
Hath there been such a time, Id fain know that, That I have
positively said Tis so, When it provd otherwise?
Not that I know.
Take this from this, if this be otherwise. If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth
is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the centre.
How may we try it further?
You know sometimes he walks four hours together Here in the
lobby.
So he does indeed.
At such a time Ill loose my daughter to him. Be you and I
behind an arras then, Mark the encounter. If he love her not, And be
not from his reason falln thereon, Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.
We will try it.
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
Away, I do beseech you, both away Ill board him presently.
O, give me leave.
 How does my good Lord Hamlet?
Well, God-a-mercy.
Do you know me, my lord?
Excellent well. Youre a fishmonger.
Not I, my lord.
Then I would you were so honest a man.
Honest, my lord?
Ay sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
picked out of ten thousand.
Thats very true, my lord.
For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good
kissing carrion, Have you a daughter?
I have, my lord.
Let her not walk i th sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look tot.
How say you by that?  Still harping on my daughter.
Yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a fishmonger. He is far
gone, far gone. And truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for
love; very near this. Ill speak to him again.What do you read, my
lord?
Words, words, words.
What is the matter, my lord?
Between who?
I mean the matter that you read, my lord.
Slanders, sir. For the satirical slave says here that old men
have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging
thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams. All which, sir, though I most
powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it
thus set down. For you yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a
crab you could go backward.
 Though this be madness, yet there is a method
int. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?
Into my grave?
Indeed, that is out o the air.  How pregnant
sometimes his replies are! A happiness that often madness hits on,
which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him
and my daughter. My honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave
of you.
You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
willingly part withal, except my life, except my life, except my life.
Fare you well, my lord.
These tedious old fools.
You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.
 God save you, sir.
 
My honoured lord!
My most dear lord!
My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
Rosencrantz. Good lads, how do ye both?
As the indifferent children of the earth.
Happy in that we are not over-happy; On Fortunes cap we
are not the very button.
Nor the soles of her shoe?
Neither, my lord.
Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?
Faith, her privates we.
In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true; she is a
strumpet. Whats the news?
None, my lord, but that the worlds grown honest.
Then is doomsday near. But your news is not true. Let me
question more in particular. What have you, my good friends, deserved
at the hands of Fortune, that she sends you to prison hither?
Prison, my lord?
Denmarks a prison.
Then is the world one.
A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
dungeons, Denmark being one o th worst.
We think not so, my lord.
Why, then tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or
bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
Why, then your ambition makes it one; tis too narrow for
your mind.
O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a
king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.
Which dreams, indeed, are ambition; for the very
substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
A dream itself is but a shadow.
Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality
that it is but a shadows shadow.
Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretchd
heroes the beggars shadows. Shall we to th court? For, by my fay, I
cannot reason.
ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN. Well wait upon you.
No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of my
servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully
attended. But, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?
To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you.
And sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you
not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
deal justly with me. Come, come; nay, speak.
What should we say, my lord?
Why, anything. But to the purpose. You were sent for; and there
is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties have not
craft enough to colour. I know the good King and Queen have sent for
you.
To what end, my lord?
That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights
of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of
our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could
charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent
for or no.
 What say you?
 Nay, then I have an eye of you. If you love me, hold
not off.
My lord, we were sent for.
I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your
discovery, and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no feather. I
have of late, but wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition
that this goodly frame the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory;
this most excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave oerhanging
firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it
appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of
vapours. What a piece of work is man! How noble in reason? How infinite
how like an angel? In apprehension, how like a god? The beauty of the
world, the paragon of animals. And yet, to me, what is this
quintessence of dust? Man delights not me; no, nor woman neither,
though by your smiling you seem to say so.
My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
Why did you laugh then, when I said Man delights not me?
To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what Lenten
entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them on the
way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
He that plays the king shall be welcome,his Majesty shall have
tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target;
the lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle a th
sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt fort. What players are they?
Even those you were wont to take such delight inthe
tragedians of the city.
How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in reputation
and profit, was better both ways.
I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
innovation.
Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the
city? Are they so followed?
No, indeed, they are not.
How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there
is, sir, an ayry of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of
question, and are most tyrannically clapped fort. These are now the
fashion, and so berattle the common stagesso they call themthat many
wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come
thither.
What, are they children? Who maintains em? How are they
escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing?
Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
playersas it is most like, if their means are no bettertheir writers
do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession?
Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the
nation holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was for a
while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to
cuffs in the question.
Ist possible?
O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
Do the boys carry it away?
Ay, that they do, my lord. Hercules and his load too.
It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and
those that would make mouths at him while my father lived, give twenty,
forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy
could find it out.
 
There are the players.
Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come. The
appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply with you
in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which I tell you must show
fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You
are welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.
In what, my dear lord?
I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly, I
know a hawk from a handsaw.
Well be with you, gentlemen.
Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too, at each ear a hearer. That
great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
Happily hes the second time come to them; for they say an
old man is twice a child.
I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark
it.You say right, sir: for a Monday morning twas so indeed.
My lord, I have news to tell you.
Rome
Buzz, buzz.
Upon my honour.
history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus
too light, for the law of writ and the liberty. These are the only men.
O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
What treasure had he, my lord?
Why One fair daughter, and no more, The which he loved
passing well.
 Still on my daughter.
Am I not i th right, old Jephthah?
If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
love passing well.
Nay, that follows not.
What follows then, my lord?
Why, As by lot, God wot, and then, you know, It came to pass,
as most like it was. The first row of the pious chanson will show you
more. For look where my abridgement comes.
You are welcome, masters, welcome all. I am glad to see thee well.
Welcome, good friends. O, my old friend! Thy face is valancd since I
saw thee last. Comst thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady
and mistress! Byr lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when I
saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you
are all welcome. Well een tot like French falconers, fly at anything
we see. Well have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.
What speech, my lord?
if it was, not above once, for the play, I remember, pleased not the
million, twas caviare to the general. But it wasas I received it, and
others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of minean
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there were no sallets in the
lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that
might indite the author of affectation, but called it an honest method,
as wholesome as sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One
speech in it, I chiefly loved. Twas Aeneas tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially where he speaks of Priams slaughter. If it
live in your memory, begin at this line, let me see, let me see: _The
rugged Pyrrhus, like th Hyrcanian beast,_ It is not so: it begins
with Pyrrhus _The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, Black as his
purpose, did the night resemble When he lay couched in the ominous
horse, Hath now this dread and black complexion smeard With heraldry
more dismal. Head to foot Now is he total gules, horridly trickd With
blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, Bakd and impasted with the
parching streets, That lend a tyrannous and a damned light To their
vile murders. Roasted in wrath and fire, And thus oersized with
coagulate gore, With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus Old
grandsire Priam seeks._ So, proceed you.
Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
discretion.
_Anon he finds him, Striking too short at Greeks. His
antique sword, Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, Repugnant to
command. Unequal matchd, Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes
wide; But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword Thunnerved father
falls. Then senseless Ilium, Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming
top Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash Takes prisoner
Pyrrhus ear. For lo, his sword, Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemd i thair to stick. So, as a painted tyrant,
Pyrrhus stood, And like a neutral to his will and matter, Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm, A silence in the heavens, the
rack stand still, The bold winds speechless, and the orb below As hush
as death, anon the dreadful thunder Doth rend the region; so after
Pyrrhus pause, Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work, And never did
the Cyclops hammers fall On Marss armour, forgd for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus bleeding sword Now falls on Priam. Out,
out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods, In general synod, take away
her power; Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, And bowl
the round nave down the hill of heaven, As low as to the fiends._
This is too long.
It shall to the barbers, with your beard.Prythee say on. Hes
for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
_But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen,_
The mobled queen?
Thats good! Mobled queen is good.
_Run barefoot up and down, threatning the flames With
bisson rheum. A clout upon that head Where late the diadem stood, and
for a robe, About her lank and all oerteemed loins, A blanket, in
thalarm of fear caught up Who this had seen, with tongue in venom
steepd, Gainst Fortunes state would treason have pronouncd. But if
the gods themselves did see her then, When she saw Pyrrhus make
malicious sport In mincing with his sword her husbands limbs, The
instant burst of clamour that she made, Unless things mortal move them
not at all, Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven, And
passion in the gods._
Look, where he has not turnd his colour, and has tears ins
eyes. Pray you, no more.
Tis well. Ill have thee speak out the rest of this soon.Good
my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them
time. After your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their
ill report while you live.
My lord, I will use them according to their desert.
Gods bodikin, man, better. Use every man after his desert, and
who should scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity.
The less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.
Come, sirs.
Follow him, friends. Well hear a play tomorrow.
 
Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play _The Murder of Gonzago_?
Ay, my lord.
Well hat tomorrow night. You could for a need study a speech
of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert int,
could you not?
Ay, my lord.
Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not.
 
 My good friends, Ill leave you
till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.
Good my lord.
 
Ay, so, God b wi ye. Now I am alone. O what a rogue and
peasant slave am I! Is it not monstrous that this player here, But in a
fiction, in a dream of passion, Could force his soul so to his own
conceit That from her working all his visage wand; Tears in his eyes,
With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing! For Hecuba? Whats
Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, That he should weep for her? What would
he do, Had he the motive and the cue for passion That I have? He would
drown the stage with tears And cleave the general ear with horrid
speech; Make mad the guilty, and appal the free, Confound the ignorant,
and amaze indeed, The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I, A dull
and muddy-mettled rascal, peak Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my
cause, And can say nothing. No, not for a king Upon whose property and
most dear life A damnd defeat was made. Am I a coward? Who calls me
villain, breaks my pate across? Plucks off my beard and blows it in my
face? Tweaks me by the nose, gives me the lie i th throat As deep as
to the lungs? Who does me this? Ha! Swounds, I should take it: for it
cannot be But I am pigeon-liverd, and lack gall To make oppression
bitter, or ere this I should have fatted all the region kites With this
slaves offal. Bloody, bawdy villain! Remorseless, treacherous,
lecherous, kindless villain! Oh vengeance! Why, what an ass am I! This
is most brave, That I, the son of a dear father murderd, Prompted to
my revenge by heaven and hell, Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with
words And fall a-cursing like a very drab, A scullion! Fie upont! Foh!
About, my brain! I have heard That guilty creatures sitting at a play,
it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ. Ill have
these players Play something like the murder of my father Before mine
uncle. Ill observe his looks; Ill tent him to the quick. If he but
blench, I know my course. The spirit that I have seen May be the devil,
and the devil hath power Tassume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps
Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such
spirits, Abuses me to damn me. Ill have grounds More relative than
this. The plays the thing Wherein Ill catch the conscience of the
King.
 
And can you by no drift of circumstance Get from him why he puts
on this confusion, Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With
turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
cause he will by no means speak.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But with a
crafty madness keeps aloof When we would bring him on to some
confession Of his true state.
Did he receive you well?
Most like a gentleman.
But with much forcing of his disposition.
Niggard of question, but of our demands, Most free in his
reply.
Did you assay him to any pastime?
Madam, it so fell out that certain players We oer-raught
on the way. Of these we told him, And there did seem in him a kind of
joy To hear of it. They are about the court, And, as I think, they have
already order This night to play before him.
Tis most true; And he beseechd me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.
With all my heart; and it doth much content me To hear him so
inclind. Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his
purpose on to these delights.
We shall, my lord.
 
Sweet Gertrude, leave us too, For we have closely sent for Hamlet
hither, That he, as twere by accident, may here Affront Ophelia. Her
father and myself, lawful espials, Will so bestow ourselves that,
seeing unseen, We may of their encounter frankly judge, And gather by
him, as he is behavd, Ift be thaffliction of his love or no That
thus he suffers for.
I shall obey you. And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That
your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlets wildness: so shall I
hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your
honours.
Madam, I wish it may.
 
Ophelia, walk you here.Gracious, so please you, We will
bestow ourselves. Read on this book, That show of such
an exercise may colour Your loneliness.We are oft to blame in this,
do sugar oer The devil himself.
 O tis too true! How smart a lash that speech doth
give my conscience! The harlots cheek, beautied with plastering art,
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it Than is my deed to my most
painted word. O heavy burden!
I hear him coming. Lets withdraw, my lord.
 
To be, or not to be, that is the question: Whether tis nobler
in the mind to suffer The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, Or
to take arms against a sea of troubles, And by opposing end them? To
dieto sleep, No more; and by a sleep to say we end The heart-ache, and
the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to: tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wishd. To die, to sleep. To sleep, perchance to
dreamay, theres the rub, For in that sleep of death what dreams may
come, When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, Must give us pause.
Theres the respect That makes calamity of so long life. For who would
bear the whips and scorns of time, The oppressors wrong, the proud
mans contumely, The pangs of disprizd love, the laws delay, The
insolence of office, and the spurns That patient merit of the unworthy
takes, When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin? Who
would these fardels bear, To grunt and sweat under a weary life, But
that the dread of something after death, The undiscoverd country, from
whose bourn No traveller returns, puzzles the will, And makes us rather
bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of? Thus
conscience does make cowards of us all, And thus the native hue of
resolution Is sicklied oer with the pale cast of thought, And
enterprises of great pith and moment, With this regard their currents
Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins rememberd.
Good my lord, How does your honour for this many a day?
I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
My lord, I have remembrances of yours That I have longed long
to re-deliver. I pray you, now receive them.
No, not I. I never gave you aught.
My honourd lord, you know right well you did, And with them
words of so sweet breath composd As made the things more rich; their
perfume lost, Take these again; for to the noble mind Rich gifts wax
poor when givers prove unkind. There, my lord.
Ha, ha! Are you honest?
My lord?
Are you fair?
What means your lordship?
That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
discourse to your beauty.
Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but
now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot so inoculate
our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you not.
I was the more deceived.
Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
sinners? I am myself indifferent honest; but yet I could accuse me of
such things that it were better my mother had not borne me. I am very
proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than I have
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and
heaven? We are arrant knaves all, believe none of us. Go thy ways to a
nunnery. Wheres your father?
At home, my lord.
Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
nowhere but ins own house. Farewell.
O help him, you sweet heavens!
If thou dost marry, Ill give thee this plague for thy dowry.
Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
calumny. Get thee to a nunnery, go: farewell. Or if thou wilt needs
marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what monsters you
make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too. Farewell.
O heavenly powers, restore him!
I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath given
you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you amble, and
you lisp, and nickname Gods creatures, and make your wantonness your
ignorance. Go to, Ill no more ont, it hath made me mad. I say, we
will have no more marriages. Those that are married already, all but
one, shall live; the rest shall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go.
 
O, what a noble mind is here oerthrown! The courtiers,
soldiers, scholars, eye, tongue, sword, Thexpectancy and rose of the
fair state, The glass of fashion and the mould of form, Thobservd of
all observers, quite, quite down! And I, of ladies most deject and
wretched, That suckd the honey of his music vows, Now see that noble
and most sovereign reason, Like sweet bells jangled out of tune and
harsh, That unmatchd form and feature of blown youth Blasted with
ecstasy. O woe is me, Thave seen what I have seen, see what I see.
Love? His affections do not that way tend, Nor what he spake,
though it lackd form a little, Was not like madness. Theres something
in his soul Oer which his melancholy sits on brood, And I do doubt the
hatch and the disclose Will be some danger, which for to prevent, I
have in quick determination Thus set it down: he shall with speed to
England For the demand of our neglected tribute: Haply the seas and
countries different, With variable objects, shall expel This something
settled matter in his heart, Whereon his brains still beating puts him
thus From fashion of himself. What think you ont?
It shall do well. But yet do I believe The origin and
commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said, We heard it all. My lord,
do as you please, But if you hold it fit, after the play, Let his queen
mother all alone entreat him To show his grief, let her be round with
him, And Ill be placd, so please you, in the ear Of all their
conference. If she find him not, To England send him; or confine him
where Your wisdom best shall think.
It shall be so. Madness in great ones must not unwatchd go.
 
Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you,
trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of your players
do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very
torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, whirlwind of passion, you must
acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it
offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a
passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings,
who, for the most part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipped for oerdoing
Termagant. It out-Herods Herod. Pray you avoid it.
I warrant your honour.
Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
special observance, that you oerstep not the modesty of nature; for
anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at
the first and now, was and is, to hold as twere the mirror up to
nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the
very age and body of the time his form and pressure. Now, this
overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot
but make the judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in
your allowance oerweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players
that I have seen playand heard others praise, and that highlynot to
speak it profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians, nor
the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed
that I have thought some of Natures journeymen had made men, and not
made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
I hope we have reformd that indifferently with us, sir.
O reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns
speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them that will
themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh
too, though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then
to be considered. Thats villanous, and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
 
How now, my lord? Will the King hear this piece of work?
And the Queen too, and that presently.
Bid the players make haste.
 
Will you two help to hasten them?
ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN. We will, my lord.
 
What ho, Horatio!
Here, sweet lord, at your service.
Horatio, thou art een as just a man As eer my conversation
copd withal.
O my dear lord.
Nay, do not think I flatter; For what advancement may I hope
from thee, That no revenue hast, but thy good spirits To feed and
clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatterd? No, let the candied
tongue lick absurd pomp, And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear? Since my dear soul was
mistress of her choice, And could of men distinguish, her election Hath
seald thee for herself. For thou hast been As one, in suffering all,
that suffers nothing, A man that Fortunes buffets and rewards Hast
taen with equal thanks. And blesd are those Whose blood and judgment
are so well co-mingled That they are not a pipe for Fortunes finger To
sound what stop she please. Give me that man That is not passions
slave, and I will wear him In my hearts core, ay, in my heart of
heart, As I do thee. Something too much of this. There is a play
Which I have told thee, of my fathers death. I prythee, when thou
mine uncle. If his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen; And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcans stithy. Give him heedful note; For I mine eyes will rivet
to his face; And after we will both our judgments join In censure of
his seeming.
Well, my lord. If he steal aught the whilst this play is
playing, And scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
They are coming to the play. I must be idle. Get you a place.
 Danish march. A flourish. Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia,
 Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and others.
How fares our cousin Hamlet?
Excellent, i faith; of the chameleons dish: I eat the air,
promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.
I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words are not
mine.
No, nor mine now.  My lord, you playd once i
thuniversity, you say?
Brutus killed me.
It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
the players ready?
Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.
Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
 O ho! do you mark that?
Lady, shall I lie in your lap?
 No, my lord.
I mean, my head upon your lap?
Ay, my lord.
Do you think I meant country matters?
I think nothing, my lord.
Thats a fair thought to lie between maids legs.
What is, my lord?
Nothing.
You are merry, my lord.
Who, I?
Ay, my lord.
O God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?
For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
withins two hours.
Nay, tis twice two months, my lord.
So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for Ill have a
suit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten yet?
Then theres hope a great mans memory may outlive his life half a
year. But byr lady, he must build churches then; or else shall he
suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is For, O,
for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!
 Trumpets sound. The dumb show enters.
_Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing him and he
her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation unto him. He takes her
up, and declines his head upon her neck. Lays him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow,
takes off his crown, kisses it, pours poison in the Kings ears, and
exits. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes passionate
seeming to lament with her. The dead body is carried away. The Poisoner
woos the Queen with gifts. She seems loth and unwilling awhile, but in
the end accepts his love._
 
What means this, my lord?
Marry, this is miching mallicho; it means mischief.
Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel;
theyll tell all.
Will they tell us what this show meant?
Ay, or any show that youll show him. Be not you ashamed to
show, hell not shame to tell you what it means.
You are naught, you are naught: Ill mark the play.
_For us, and for our tragedy, Here stooping to your clemency,
We beg your hearing patiently._
Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
Tis brief, my lord.
As womans love.
Full thirty times hath Phoebus cart gone round Neptunes
salt wash and Tellus orbed ground, And thirty dozen moons with
borrowd sheen About the world have times twelve thirties been, Since
love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands Unite commutual in most sacred
bands.
So many journeys may the sun and moon Make us again count
oer ere love be done. But, woe is me, you are so sick of late, So far
from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you. Yet, though
I distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For womens fear
and love holds quantity, In neither aught, or in extremity. Now what my
love is, proof hath made you know, And as my love is sizd, my fear is
so. Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear; Where little
fears grow great, great love grows there.
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too: My
operant powers their functions leave to do: And thou shalt live in this
fair world behind, Honourd, belovd, and haply one as kind For husband
shalt thou
O confound the rest. Such love must needs be treason in
my breast. In second husband let me be accurst! None wed the second but
who killd the first.
 Wormwood, wormwood.
The instances that second marriage move Are base respects
of thrift, but none of love. A second time I kill my husband dead, When
second husband kisses me in bed.
I do believe you think what now you speak; But what we do
determine, oft we break. Purpose is but the slave to memory, Of violent
birth, but poor validity: Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the
tree, But fall unshaken when they mellow be. Most necessary tis that
we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt. What to ourselves
in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The
destroy. Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament; Grief joys, joy
grieves, on slender accident. This world is not for aye; nor tis not
strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change, For tis a
question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else
fortune love. The great man down, you mark his favourite flies, The
poor advancd makes friends of enemies; And hitherto doth love on
fortune tend: For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in
want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy. But
orderly to end where I begun, Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown. Our thoughts are ours, their
ends none of our own. So think thou wilt no second husband wed, But die
thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light, Sport and
repose lock from me day and night, To desperation turn my trust and
hope, An anchors cheer in prison be my scope, Each opposite that
blanks the face of joy, Meet what I would have well, and it destroy!
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife, If, once a widow, ever I
be wife.
 If she should break it now.
Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile. My spirits
grow dull, and fain I would beguile The tedious day with sleep.

Sleep rock thy brain, And never come mischance between us
twain.
 
Madam, how like you this play?
The lady protests too much, methinks.
O, but shell keep her word.
Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence int?
No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i th
world.
What do you call the play?
_The Mousetrap._ Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the image
of a murder done in Vienna. Gonzago is the Dukes name, his wife
Baptista: you shall see anon; tis a knavish piece of work: but what o
that? Your majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not. Let
the galld jade wince; our withers are unwrung.
This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.
You are a good chorus, my lord.
I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the
puppets dallying.
You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.
Still better, and worse.
So you mistake your husbands.Begin, murderer. Pox, leave thy
damnable faces, and begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing; Thou mixture rank, of
midnight weeds collected, With Hecates ban thrice blasted, thrice
infected, Thy natural magic and dire property On wholesome life usurp
immediately.
He poisons him i thgarden fors estate. His names Gonzago.
The story is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You shall see
anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzagos wife.
The King rises.
What, frighted with false fire?
How fares my lord?
Give oer the play.
Give me some light. Away.
All. Lights, lights, lights.
 
Why, let the strucken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play; For
some must watch, while some must sleep, So runs the world away. Would
not this, sir, and a forest of feathers, if the rest of my fortunes
turn Turk with me; with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me
a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
Half a share.
A whole one, I. For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm
dismantled was Of Jove himself, and now reigns here A very,
verypajock.
You might have rhymed.
O good Horatio, Ill take the ghosts word for a thousand
pound. Didst perceive?
Very well, my lord.
Upon the talk of the poisoning?
I did very well note him.
Ah, ha! Come, some music. Come, the recorders. For if the king
like not the comedy, Why then, belike he likes it not, perdie. Come,
some music.
Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
Sir, a whole history.
The King, sir
Ay, sir, what of him?
Is in his retirement, marvellous distempered.
With drink, sir?
No, my lord; rather with choler.
Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to
the doctor, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him
into far more choler.
Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and
start not so wildly from my affair.
I am tame, sir, pronounce.
The Queen your mother, in most great affliction of
spirit, hath sent me to you.
You are welcome.
Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right
breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do
your mothers commandment; if not, your pardon and my return shall be
the end of my business.
Sir, I cannot.
What, my lord?
Make you a wholesome answer. My wits diseased. But, sir, such
answer as I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say, my
mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter. My mother, you say,
Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
amazement and admiration.
O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
sequel at the heels of this mothers admiration?
She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to
bed.
We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
further trade with us?
My lord, you once did love me.
And so I do still, by these pickers and stealers.
Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do
surely bar the door upon your own liberty if you deny your griefs to
your friend.
Sir, I lack advancement.
How can that be, when you have the voice of the King
himself for your succession in Denmark?
Ay, sir, but while the grass growsthe proverb is something
musty.
 Re-enter the Players with recorders.
O, the recorders. Let me see one.To withdraw with you, why do you go
about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too
unmannerly.
I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
My lord, I cannot.
I pray you.
Believe me, I cannot.
I do beseech you.
I know no touch of it, my lord.
Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with your finger
and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most
eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony. I
have not the skill.
Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to
the top of my compass; and there is much music, excellent voice, in
this little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. Sblood, do you think
I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what instrument you
will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me.
God bless you, sir.
My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.
Do you see yonder cloud thats almost in shape of a camel?
By the mass, and tis like a camel indeed.
Methinks it is like a weasel.
It is backed like a weasel.
Or like a whale.
Very like a whale.
Then will I come to my mother by and by.They fool me to the
top of my bent.I will come by and by.
I will say so.
 
By and by is easily said. Leave me, friends.
 
Tis now the very witching time of night, When churchyards yawn, and
hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood, And do such bitter business as the day Would quake to look on.
Soft now, to my mother. O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever The
soul of Nero enter this firm bosom: Let me be cruel, not unnatural. I
will speak daggers to her, but use none; My tongue and soul in this be
hypocrites. How in my words somever she be shent, To give them seals
never, my soul, consent.
 
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us To let his madness
range. Therefore prepare you, I your commission will forthwith
dispatch, And he to England shall along with you. The terms of our
estate may not endure Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow Out of his
lunacies.
We will ourselves provide. Most holy and religious fear
it is To keep those many many bodies safe That live and feed upon your
Majesty.
The single and peculiar life is bound With all the
strength and armour of the mind, To keep itself from noyance; but much
more That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest The lives of many. The
cease of majesty Dies not alone; but like a gulf doth draw Whats near
it with it. It is a massy wheel Fixd on the summit of the highest
mount, To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things Are mortisd and
adjoind; which when it falls, Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boistrous ruin. Never alone Did the King sigh, but with a
general groan.
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage; For we will fetters
put upon this fear, Which now goes too free-footed.
ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN. We will haste us.
 
My lord, hes going to his mothers closet. Behind the arras
Ill convey myself To hear the process. Ill warrant shell tax him
home, And as you said, and wisely was it said, Tis meet that some more
audience than a mother, Since nature makes them partial, should
oerhear The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege, Ill call upon
you ere you go to bed, And tell you what I know.
Thanks, dear my lord.
 
O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven; It hath the primal eldest
curse upont, A brothers murder! Pray can I not, Though inclination
be as sharp as will: My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, And,
like a man to double business bound, I stand in pause where I shall
first begin, And both neglect. What if this cursed hand Were thicker
than itself with brothers blood, Is there not rain enough in the sweet
heavens To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy But to confront
the visage of offence? And whats in prayer but this twofold force, To
be forestalled ere we come to fall, Or pardond being down? Then Ill
look up. My fault is past. But O, what form of prayer Can serve my
turn? Forgive me my foul murder! That cannot be; since I am still
possessd Of those effects for which I did the murder, My crown, mine
own ambition, and my queen. May one be pardond and retain thoffence?
In the corrupted currents of this world Offences gilded hand may shove
by justice, And oft tis seen the wicked prize itself Buys out the law.
his true nature, and we ourselves compelld Even to the teeth and
forehead of our faults, To give in evidence. What then? What rests? Try
what repentance can. What can it not? Yet what can it, when one cannot
repent? O wretched state! O bosom black as death! O limed soul, that
struggling to be free, Art more engagd! Help, angels! Make assay: Bow,
stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel, Be soft as sinews of
the new-born babe. All may be well.
 
Now might I do it pat, now he is praying. And now Ill dot.
And so he goes to heaven; And so am I revengd. That would be scannd:
A villain kills my father, and for that I, his sole son, do this same
villain send To heaven. O, this is hire and salary, not revenge. He
took my father grossly, full of bread, With all his crimes broad blown,
as flush as May; And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven? But
in our circumstance and course of thought, Tis heavy with him. And am
I then revengd, To take him in the purging of his soul, When he is fit
and seasond for his passage? No. Up, sword, and know thou a more
horrid hent: When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage, Or in
thincestuous pleasure of his bed, At gaming, swearing; or about some
may kick at heaven, And that his soul may be as damnd and black As
hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays. This physic but prolongs thy
sickly days.
 
 The King rises and advances.
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below. Words without thoughts
never to heaven go.
 
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him, Tell him his
pranks have been too broad to bear with, And that your Grace hath
screend and stood between Much heat and him. Ill silence me een
here. Pray you be round with him.
 Mother, mother, mother.
Ill warrant you, Fear me not. Withdraw, I hear him coming.
 
Now, mother, whats the matter?
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mother, you have my father much offended.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Why, how now, Hamlet?
Whats the matter now?
Have you forgot me?
No, by the rood, not so. You are the Queen, your husbands
brothers wife, And, would it were not so. You are my mother.
Nay, then Ill set those to you that can speak.
Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not budge. You go not
till I set you up a glass Where you may see the inmost part of you.
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me? Help, help, ho!
 What, ho! help, help, help!
How now? A rat?  Dead for a ducat, dead!
 
 O, I am slain!
 
O me, what hast thou done?
Nay, I know not. is it the King?
 
O what a rash and bloody deed is this!
A bloody deed. Almost as bad, good mother, As kill a king and
marry with his brother.
As kill a king?
Ay, lady, twas my word.  Thou wretched, rash,
intruding fool, farewell! I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune,
Thou findst to be too busy is some danger. Leave wringing of your
hands. Peace, sit you down, And let me wring your heart, for so I
shall, If it be made of penetrable stuff; If damned custom have not
brazd it so, That it is proof and bulwark against sense.
What have I done, that thou darst wag thy tongue In noise so
rude against me?
virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose From the fair forehead of an
innocent love, And sets a blister there. Makes marriage vows As false
The very soul, and sweet religion makes A rhapsody of words. Heavens
face doth glow, Yea this solidity and compound mass, With tristful
Look here upon this picture, and on this, The counterfeit
presentment of two brothers. See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperions curls, the front of Jove himself, An eye like Mars, to
threaten and command, A station like the herald Mercury New lighted on
a heaven-kissing hill: A combination and a form indeed, Where every god
did seem to set his seal, To give the world assurance of a man. This
was your husband. Look you now what follows. Here is your husband, like
a mildewd ear Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes? Could you
on this fair mountain leave to feed, And batten on this moor? Ha! have
you eyes? You cannot call it love; for at your age The hey-day in the
blood is tame, its humble, And waits upon the judgment: and what
judgment Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have, Else could
you not have motion; but sure that sense Is apoplexd, for madness
would not err Nor sense to ecstacy was neer so thralld But it
reservd some quantity of choice To serve in such a difference. What
devil wast That thus hath cozend you at hoodman-blind? Eyes without
feeling, feeling without sight, Ears without hands or eyes, smelling
sans all, Or but a sickly part of one true sense Could not so mope. O
shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell, If thou canst mutine in a
matrons bones, To flaming youth let virtue be as wax, And melt in her
own fire. Proclaim no shame When the compulsive ardour gives the
will.
O Hamlet, speak no more. Thou turnst mine eyes into my very
soul, And there I see such black and grained spots As will not leave
their tinct.
Nay, but to live In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed, Stewd
in corruption, honeying and making love Over the nasty sty.
O speak to me no more; These words like daggers enter in mine
ears; No more, sweet Hamlet.
A murderer and a villain; A slave that is not twentieth part
the tithe Of your precedent lord. A vice of kings, A cutpurse of the
empire and the rule, That from a shelf the precious diadem stole And
put it in his pocket!
No more.
A king of shreds and patches!
Save me and hover oer me with your wings, You heavenly guards! What
would your gracious figure?
Alas, hes mad.
Do you not come your tardy son to chide, That, lapsd in time
say!
Do not forget. This visitation Is but to whet thy almost blunted
purpose. But look, amazement on thy mother sits. O step between her and
her fighting soul. Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works. Speak to
her, Hamlet.
How is it with you, lady?
Alas, how ist with you, That you do bend your eye on vacancy,
And with the incorporal air do hold discourse? Forth at your eyes your
spirits wildly peep, And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm, Your
bedded hairs, like life in excrements, Start up and stand an end. O
gentle son, Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper Sprinkle cool
patience. Whereon do you look?
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares, His form and cause
conjoind, preaching to stones, Would make them capable.Do not look
Then what I have to do Will want true colour; tears perchance for
blood.
To whom do you speak this?
Do you see nothing there?
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.
Nor did you nothing hear?
No, nothing but ourselves.
Why, look you there! look how it steals away! My father, in his
habit as he livd! Look where he goes even now out at the portal.
 
This is the very coinage of your brain. This bodiless creation
ecstasy Is very cunning in.
Ecstasy! My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time, And
makes as healthful music. It is not madness That I have utterd. Bring
me to the test, And I the matter will re-word; which madness Would
gambol from. Mother, for love of grace, Lay not that flattering unction
to your soul That not your trespass, but my madness speaks. It will but
skin and film the ulcerous place, Whilst rank corruption, mining all
within, Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven, Repent whats past,
avoid what is to come; And do not spread the compost on the weeds, To
make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue; For in the fatness of
these pursy times Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg, Yea, curb and
woo for leave to do him good.
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
O throw away the worser part of it, And live the purer with the
other half. Good night. But go not to mine uncles bed. Assume a
virtue, if you have it not. That monster custom, who all sense doth
fair and good He likewise gives a frock or livery That aptly is put on.
Refrain tonight, And that shall lend a kind of easiness To the next
abstinence. The next more easy; For use almost can change the stamp of
nature, And either curb the devil, or throw him out With wondrous
potency. Once more, good night, And when you are desirous to be blesd,
Ill blessing beg of you. For this same lord 
I do repent; but heaven hath pleasd it so, To punish me with this, and
this with me, That I must be their scourge and minister. I will bestow
him, and will answer well The death I gave him. So again, good night. I
must be cruel, only to be kind: Thus bad begins, and worse remains
behind. One word more, good lady.
What shall I do?
Not this, by no means, that I bid you do: Let the bloat King
tempt you again to bed, Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses, Or paddling in your neck with
his damnd fingers, Make you to ravel all this matter out, That I
essentially am not in madness, But mad in craft. Twere good you let
him know, For who thats but a queen, fair, sober, wise, Would from a
paddock, from a bat, a gib, Such dear concernings hide? Who would do
so? No, in despite of sense and secrecy, Unpeg the basket on the
houses top, Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, To try
conclusions, in the basket creep And break your own neck down.
Be thou assurd, if words be made of breath, And breath of life,
I have no life to breathe What thou hast said to me.
I must to England, you know that?
Alack, I had forgot. Tis so concluded on.
Theres letters seald: and my two schoolfellows, Whom I will
trust as I will adders fangd, They bear the mandate, they must sweep
my way And marshal me to knavery. Let it work; For tis the sport to
have the enginer Hoist with his own petard, and t shall go hard But I
will delve one yard below their mines And blow them at the moon. O,
tis most sweet, When in one line two crafts directly meet. This man
shall set me packing. Ill lug the guts into the neighbour room.
Mother, good night. Indeed, this counsellor Is now most still, most
secret, and most grave, Who was in life a foolish peating knave. Come,
sir, to draw toward an end with you. Good night, mother.
 
Theres matter in these sighs. These profound heaves You must
translate. tis fit we understand them. Where is your son?
Bestow this place on us a little while.
Ah, my good lord, what have I seen tonight!
What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?
Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend Which is the
mightier. In his lawless fit Behind the arras hearing something stir,
Whips out his rapier, cries A rat, a rat! And in this brainish
apprehension kills The unseen good old man.
O heavy deed! It had been so with us, had we been there. His
liberty is full of threats to all; To you yourself, to us, to everyone.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answerd? It will be laid to us,
whose providence Should have kept short, restraind, and out of haunt
This mad young man. But so much was our love We would not understand
what was most fit, But like the owner of a foul disease, To keep it
from divulging, let it feed Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
To draw apart the body he hath killd, Oer whom his very
madness, like some ore Among a mineral of metals base, Shows itself
pure. He weeps for what is done.
O Gertrude, come away! The sun no sooner shall the mountains
touch But we will ship him hence, and this vile deed We must with all
our majesty and skill Both countenance and excuse.Ho, Guildenstern!
 Re-enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Friends both, go join you with some further aid: Hamlet in madness hath
Polonius slain, And from his mothers closet hath he draggd him. Go
seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body Into the chapel. I pray
you haste in this.
 
Come, Gertrude, well call up our wisest friends, And let them know
both what we mean to do And whats untimely done, so haply slander,
Whose whisper oer the worlds diameter, As level as the cannon to his
blank, Transports his poisond shot, may miss our name, And hit the
woundless air. O, come away! My soul is full of discord and dismay.
 
Safely stowed.
ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN.  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!
What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.
What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
Compounded it with dust, whereto tis kin.
Tell us where tis, that we may take it thence, And bear
it to the chapel.
Do not believe it.
Believe what?
That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
demanded of a spongewhat replication should be made by the son of a
king?
Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
Ay, sir; that soaks up the Kings countenance, his rewards, his
authorities. But such officers do the King best service in the end: he
keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to be
last swallowed: when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but
squeezing you, and, sponge, you shall be dry again.
I understand you not, my lord.
I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us
to the King.
The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body.
The King is a thing
A thing, my lord!
Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
 
I have sent to seek him and to find the body. How dangerous is it
that this man goes loose! Yet must not we put the strong law on him:
but their eyes; And where tis so, thoffenders scourge is weighd,
But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even, This sudden sending
him away must seem Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown By
desperate appliance are relievd, Or not at all.
How now? What hath befalln?
Where the dead body is bestowd, my lord, We cannot get
from him.
But where is he?
Without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure.
Bring him before us.
Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
Now, Hamlet, wheres Polonius?
At supper.
At supper? Where?
Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain convocation
of politic worms are een at him. Your worm is your only emperor for
diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for
maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable
service,two dishes, but to one table. Thats the end.
Alas, alas!
A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
What dost thou mean by this?
Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
the guts of a beggar.
Where is Polonius?
In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
there, seek him i thother place yourself. But indeed, if you find him
not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into
the lobby.
 Go seek him there.
He will stay till you come.
 
Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety, Which we do
tender, as we dearly grieve For that which thou hast done,must send
thee hence With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself; The bark is
ready, and the wind at help, Thassociates tend, and everything is bent
For England.
For England?
Ay, Hamlet.
Good.
So is it, if thou knewst our purposes.
I see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for England!
Farewell, dear mother.
Thy loving father, Hamlet.
My mother. Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England.
 
Follow him at foot. Tempt him with speed aboard; Delay it not;
Ill have him hence tonight. Away, for everything is seald and done
That else leans on thaffair. Pray you make haste.
 
And England, if my love thou holdst at aught, As my great power
thereof may give thee sense, Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe Pays homage to us,thou mayst
not coldly set Our sovereign process, which imports at full, By letters
conjuring to that effect, The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;
For like the hectic in my blood he rages, And thou must cure me. Till I
know tis done, Howeer my haps, my joys were neer begun.
 
Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king. Tell him that
by his license, Fortinbras Craves the conveyance of a promisd march
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous. If that his Majesty would
aught with us, We shall express our duty in his eye; And let him know
so.
I will dot, my lord.
Go softly on.
 
Good sir, whose powers are these?
They are of Norway, sir.
How purposd, sir, I pray you?
Against some part of Poland.
Who commands them, sir?
The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.
Goes it against the main of Poland, sir, Or for some frontier?
Truly to speak, and with no addition, We go to gain a little
patch of ground That hath in it no profit but the name. To pay five
ducats, five, I would not farm it; Nor will it yield to Norway or the
Pole A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
Why, then the Polack never will defend it.
Yes, it is already garrisond.
Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats Will not debate
the question of this straw! This is thimposthume of much wealth and
peace, That inward breaks, and shows no cause without Why the man dies.
I humbly thank you, sir.
God b wi you, sir.
 
Willt please you go, my lord?
Ill be with you straight. Go a little before.
 
How all occasions do inform against me, And spur my dull revenge. What
is a man If his chief good and market of his time Be but to sleep and
feed? A beast, no more. Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
Looking before and after, gave us not That capability and godlike
reason To fust in us unusd. Now whether it be Bestial oblivion, or
some craven scruple Of thinking too precisely on thevent, A thought
which, quarterd, hath but one part wisdom And ever three parts
coward,I do not know Why yet I live to say this things to do, Sith I
have cause, and will, and strength, and means To dot. Examples gross
as earth exhort me, Witness this army of such mass and charge, Led by a
delicate and tender prince, Whose spirit, with divine ambition puffd,
Makes mouths at the invisible event, Exposing what is mortal and unsure
To all that fortune, death, and danger dare, Even for an eggshell.
Rightly to be great Is not to stir without great argument, But greatly
to find quarrel in a straw When honours at the stake. How stand I
then, That have a father killd, a mother staind, Excitements of my
reason and my blood, And let all sleep, while to my shame I see The
imminent death of twenty thousand men That, for a fantasy and trick of
fame, Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot Whereon the
numbers cannot try the cause, Which is not tomb enough and continent To
hide the slain? O, from this time forth, My thoughts be bloody or be
nothing worth.
 
I will not speak with her.
pitied.
What would she have?
She speaks much of her father; says she hears Theres tricks
i th world, and hems, and beats her heart, Spurns enviously at
straws, speaks things in doubt, That carry but half sense. Her speech
is nothing, Yet the unshaped use of it doth move The hearers to
collection; they aim at it, And botch the words up fit to their own
thoughts, Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them,
Indeed would make one think there might be thought, Though nothing
sure, yet much unhappily. Twere good she were spoken with, for she may
strew Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Let her come in.
 
To my sick soul, as sins true nature is, Each toy seems prologue to
some great amiss. So full of artless jealousy is guilt, It spills
itself in fearing to be spilt.
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?
How now, Ophelia?
 How should I your true love know From another one?
By his cockle bat and staff And his sandal shoon.
Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Say you? Nay, pray you mark.  He is dead and gone,
lady, He is dead and gone, At his head a grass green turf, At his heels
a stone.
Nay, but Ophelia
Pray you mark.  White his shroud as the mountain
snow.
Alas, look here, my lord!
 Larded all with sweet flowers; Which bewept to the
grave did go With true-love showers.
How do you, pretty lady?
Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a bakers daughter.
Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your
table!
Conceit upon her father.
Pray you, lets have no words of this; but when they ask you
what it means, say you this:  Tomorrow is Saint Valentines
day, All in the morning betime, And I a maid at your window, To be your
Valentine.
   Then up he rose and donnd his clothes, And duppd the chamber door,
   Let in the maid, that out a maid Never departed more.
Pretty Ophelia!
Indeed la, without an oath, Ill make an end ont. 
By Gis and by Saint Charity, Alack, and fie for shame! Young men will
dot if they come tot; By Cock, they are to blame.
   Quoth she, before you tumbled me, You promisd me to wed. So would I
   ha done, by yonder sun, An thou hadst not come to my bed.
How long hath she been thus?
I hope all will be well. We must be patient. But I cannot
choose but weep, to think they would lay him i th cold ground. My
brother shall know of it. And so I thank you for your good counsel.
Come, my coach! Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies; good
night, good night.
 
Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray you.
 
O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs All from her fathers
death. O Gertrude, Gertrude, When sorrows come, they come not single
spies, But in battalions. First, her father slain; Next, your son gone;
and he most violent author Of his own just remove; the people muddied,
Thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers For good
Polonius death; and we have done but greenly In hugger-mugger to inter
him. Poor Ophelia Divided from herself and her fair judgment, Without
the which we are pictures or mere beasts. Last, and as much containing
as all these, Her brother is in secret come from France, Feeds on his
wonder, keeps himself in clouds, And wants not buzzers to infect his
ear With pestilent speeches of his fathers death, Wherein necessity,
of matter beggard, Will nothing stick our person to arraign In ear and
ear. O my dear Gertrude, this, Like to a murdering piece, in many
places Gives me superfluous death.
 
Alack, what noise is this?
Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.
What is the matter?
Save yourself, my lord. The ocean, overpeering of his list,
Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste Than young Laertes, in a
riotous head, Oerbears your offices. The rabble call him lord, And, as
the world were now but to begin, Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
The ratifiers and props of every word, They cry Choose we! Laertes
shall be king! Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
Laertes shall be king, Laertes king.
How cheerfully on the false trail they cry. O, this is counter,
you false Danish dogs.
 
The doors are broke.
Where is this king?Sirs, stand you all without.
Danes. No, lets come in.
I pray you, give me leave.
We will, we will.
 
I thank you. Keep the door. O thou vile king, Give me my
father.
Calmly, good Laertes.
That drop of blood thats calm proclaims me bastard; Cries
cuckold to my father, brands the harlot Even here between the chaste
unsmirched brow Of my true mother.
What is the cause, Laertes, That thy rebellion looks so
giant-like? Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person. Theres such
divinity doth hedge a king, That treason can but peep to what it would,
incensd.Let him go, Gertrude: Speak, man.
Where is my father?
Dead.
But not by him.
Let him demand his fill.
How came he dead? Ill not be juggled with. To hell,
allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil! Conscience and grace, to the
profoundest pit! I dare damnation. To this point I stand, That both the
worlds, I give to negligence, Let come what comes; only Ill be
revengd Most throughly for my father.
Who shall stay you?
My will, not all the world. And for my means, Ill husband
them so well, They shall go far with little.
Good Laertes, If you desire to know the certainty Of your dear
fathers death, ist writ in your revenge That, sweepstake, you will
draw both friend and foe, Winner and loser?
None but his enemies.
Will you know them then?
To his good friends thus wide Ill ope my arms; And, like the
kind life-rendering pelican, Repast them with my blood.
Why, now you speak Like a good child and a true gentleman. That I
am guiltless of your fathers death, And am most sensibly in grief for
it, It shall as level to your judgment pear As day does to your eye.
 Let her come in.
How now! What noise is that?
 Re-enter Ophelia, fantastically dressed with straws and flowers.
O heat, dry up my brains. Tears seven times salt, Burn out the sense
and virtue of mine eye. By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,
Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May! Dear maid, kind sister,
sweet Ophelia! O heavens, ist possible a young maids wits Should be
as mortal as an old mans life? Nature is fine in love, and where tis
fine, It sends some precious instance of itself After the thing it
loves.
 They bore him barefacd on the bier, Hey no nonny,
nonny, hey nonny And on his grave raind many a tear. Fare you well,
my dove!
Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge, It could not
move thus.
You must sing Down a-down, and you call him a-down-a. O, how
the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward that stole his masters
daughter.
This nothings more than matter.
Theres rosemary, thats for remembrance; pray love, remember.
And there is pansies, thats for thoughts.
A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.
Theres fennel for you, and columbines. Theres rue for you;
and heres some for me. We may call it herb of grace o Sundays. O you
must wear your rue with a difference. Theres a daisy. I would give you
some violets, but they witherd all when my father died. They say he
made a good end.  For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.
Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself She turns to
favour and to prettiness.
 And will he not come again? And will he not come
again? No, no, he is dead, Go to thy death-bed, He never will come
again.
   His beard was as white as snow, All flaxen was his poll. He is gone,
   he is gone, And we cast away moan. God ha mercy on his soul.
And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God b wi ye.
 
Do you see this, O God?
Laertes, I must commune with your grief, Or you deny me right. Go
but apart, Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will, And they
shall hear and judge twixt you and me. If by direct or by collateral
hand They find us touchd, we will our kingdom give, Our crown, our
you content to lend your patience to us, And we shall jointly labour
with your soul To give it due content.
Let this be so; His means of death, his obscure burial, No
trophy, sword, nor hatchment oer his bones, No noble rite, nor formal
ostentation, Cry to be heard, as twere from heaven to earth, That I
must callt in question.
So you shall. And where thoffence is let the great axe fall. I
pray you go with me.
 
What are they that would speak with me?
Sailors, sir. They say they have letters for you.
Let them come in.
 
I do not know from what part of the world I should be greeted, if not
from Lord Hamlet.
God bless you, sir.
Let him bless thee too.
He shall, sir, andt please him. Theres a letter for
you, sir. It comes from thambassador that was bound for England; if
your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.
 Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this,
give these fellows some means to the King. They have letters for him.
Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment
gave us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a
compelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded them. On the instant
they got clear of our ship, so I alone became their prisoner. They have
dealt with me like thieves of mercy. But they knew what they did; I am
to do a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters I have sent,
and repair thou to me with as much haste as thou wouldst fly death. I
have words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much
too light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
thee where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course for
England: of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell. He that thou
knowest thine, HAMLET.
Come, I will give you way for these your letters, And dot the
speedier, that you may direct me To him from whom you brought them.
 
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal, And you must put me
in your heart for friend, Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your noble father slain Pursud my life.
It well appears. But tell me Why you proceeded not against
these feats, So crimeful and so capital in nature, As by your safety,
wisdom, all things else, You mainly were stirrd up.
O, for two special reasons, Which may to you, perhaps, seem much
unsinewd, But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mother Lives
almost by his looks; and for myself, My virtue or my plague, be it
either which, Shes so conjunctive to my life and soul, That, as the
star moves not but in his sphere, I could not but by her. The other
motive, Why to a public count I might not go, Is the great love the
general gender bear him, Who, dipping all his faults in their
affection, Would like the spring that turneth wood to stone, Convert
his gyves to graces; so that my arrows, Too slightly timberd for so
loud a wind, Would have reverted to my bow again, And not where I had
aimd them.
And so have I a noble father lost, A sister driven into
desperate terms, Whose worth, if praises may go back again, Stood
challenger on mount of all the age For her perfections. But my revenge
will come.
Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think That we are
made of stuff so flat and dull That we can let our beard be shook with
danger, And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more. I lovd your
father, and we love ourself, And that, I hope, will teach you to
imagine
How now? What news?
Letters, my lord, from Hamlet. This to your Majesty; this to
the Queen.
From Hamlet! Who brought them?
Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not. They were given
me by Claudio. He receivd them Of him that brought them.
Laertes, you shall hear them. Leave us.
 
 High and mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your
kingdom. Tomorrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes. When I
shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasions of my
sudden and more strange return. HAMLET.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back? Or is it some abuse,
and no such thing?
Know you the hand?
says alone. Can you advise me?
I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come, It warms the very
sickness in my heart That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, Thus
diest thou.
If it be so, Laertes, As how should it be so? How otherwise?
Will you be ruld by me?
Ay, my lord; So you will not oerrule me to a peace.
To thine own peace. If he be now returnd, As checking at his
voyage, and that he means No more to undertake it, I will work him To
exploit, now ripe in my device, Under the which he shall not choose but
fall; And for his death no wind shall breathe, But even his mother
My lord, I will be ruld; The rather if you could devise it so
That I might be the organ.
It falls right. You have been talkd of since your travel much,
And that in Hamlets hearing, for a quality Wherein they say you shine.
Your sum of parts Did not together pluck such envy from him As did that
one, and that, in my regard, Of the unworthiest siege.
What part is that, my lord?
A very riband in the cap of youth, Yet needful too, for youth no
less becomes The light and careless livery that it wears Than settled
age his sables and his weeds, Importing health and graveness. Two
months since Here was a gentleman of Normandy, Ive seen myself, and
servd against, the French, And they can well on horseback, but this
gallant Had witchcraft int. He grew unto his seat, And to such
wondrous doing brought his horse, As had he been incorpsd and
demi-naturd With the brave beast. So far he toppd my thought That I
in forgery of shapes and tricks, Come short of what he did.
A Norman wast?
A Norman.
Upon my life, Lamond.
The very same.
I know him well. He is the brooch indeed And gem of all the
nation.
He made confession of you, And gave you such a masterly report
For art and exercise in your defence, And for your rapier most
especially, That he cried out twould be a sight indeed If one could
match you. The scrimers of their nation He swore had neither motion,
guard, nor eye, If you opposd them. Sir, this report of his Did Hamlet
so envenom with his envy That he could nothing do but wish and beg Your
sudden coming oer to play with him. Now, out of this,
What out of this, my lord?
Laertes, was your father dear to you? Or are you like the
painting of a sorrow, A face without a heart?
Why ask you this?
Not that I think you did not love your father, But that I know
love is begun by time, And that I see, in passages of proof, Time
qualifies the spark and fire of it. There lives within the very flame
of love A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it; And nothing is at a
like goodness still, For goodness, growing to a pleurisy, Dies in his
own too much. That we would do, We should do when we would; for this
would changes, And hath abatements and delays as many As there are
tongues, are hands, are accidents; And then this should is like a
spendthrift sigh That hurts by easing. But to the quick o thulcer:
Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake To show yourself your
fathers son in deed, More than in words?
To cut his throat i th church.
No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize; Revenge should have
no bounds. But good Laertes, Will you do this, keep close within your
chamber. Hamlet returnd shall know you are come home: Well put on
those shall praise your excellence, And set a double varnish on the
fame The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together And wager on
your heads. He, being remiss, Most generous, and free from all
contriving, Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease, Or with a
little shuffling, you may choose A sword unbated, and in a pass of
I will dot. And for that purpose Ill anoint my sword. I
bought an unction of a mountebank So mortal that, but dip a knife in
it, Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare, Collected from all
simples that have virtue Under the moon, can save the thing from death
This is but scratchd withal. Ill touch my point With this contagion,
that if I gall him slightly, It may be death.
Lets further think of this, Weigh what convenience both of time
and means May fit us to our shape. If this should fail, And that our
drift look through our bad performance. Twere better not assayd.
Therefore this project Should have a back or second, that might hold If
this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see. Well make a solemn wager on
your cunnings, I hat! When in your motion you are hot and dry, As
make your bouts more violent to that end, And that he calls for drink,
Ill have prepard him A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping, If
he by chance escape your venomd stuck, Our purpose may hold there.
How now, sweet Queen?
One woe doth tread upon anothers heel, So fast they follow.
Your sisters drownd, Laertes.
Drownd! O, where?
There is a willow grows aslant a brook, That shows his hoary
leaves in the glassy stream. There with fantastic garlands did she make
Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples, That liberal
shepherds give a grosser name, But our cold maids do dead mens fingers
call them. There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds Clambring to
hang, an envious sliver broke, When down her weedy trophies and herself
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide, And mermaid-like,
awhile they bore her up, Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
As one incapable of her own distress, Or like a creature native and
indued Unto that element. But long it could not be Till that her
garments, heavy with their drink, Pulld the poor wretch from her
melodious lay To muddy death.
Alas, then she is drownd?
Drownd, drownd.
Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I
forbid my tears. But yet It is our trick; nature her custom holds, Let
shame say what it will. When these are gone, The woman will be out.
Adieu, my lord, I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze, But
that this folly douts it.
 
Lets follow, Gertrude; How much I had to do to calm his rage!
Now fear I this will give it start again; Therefore lets follow.
 
Is she to be buried in Christian burial, when she wilfully
seeks her own salvation?
I tell thee she is, and therefore make her grave
straight. The crowner hath sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.
How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own
defence?
Why, tis found so.
It must be _se offendendo_, it cannot be else. For here
she drowned herself wittingly.
Nay, but hear you, goodman delver,
Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is, will
he nill he, he goes,mark you that. But if the water come to him and
drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not guilty of his
own death shortens not his own life.
But is this law?
Ay, marry, ist, crowners quest law.
Will you ha the truth ont? If this had not been a
gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o Christian burial.
Why, there thou sayst. And the more pity that great folk
should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves more
than their even Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient
gentlemen but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up
Adams profession.
Was he a gentleman?
He was the first that ever bore arms.
Why, he had none.
What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the
Scripture? The Scripture says Adam diggd. Could he dig without arms?
Ill put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself
Go to.
What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
shipwright, or the carpenter?
The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand
tenants.
I like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows does well.
But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost
ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church; argal, the
gallows may do well to thee. Tot again, come.
Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
carpenter?
Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
Marry, now I can tell.
Tot.
Mass, I cannot tell.
Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
not mend his pace with beating; and when you are asked this question
next, say a grave-maker. The houses he makes last till doomsday. Go,
get thee to Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of liquor.
 

   In youth when I did love, did love, Methought it was very sweet; To
   nothing meet.
Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
grave-making?
Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.
Tis een so; the hand of little employment hath the daintier
sense.
 But age with his stealing steps Hath clawd me
in his clutch, And hath shippd me into the land, As if I had never
been such.
 
That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
knave jowls it to th ground, as if twere Cains jawbone, that did the
first murder! This might be the pate of a politician which this ass now
oer-offices, one that would circumvent God, might it not?
It might, my lord.
Or of a courtier, which could say Good morrow, sweet lord! How
dost thou, good lord? This might be my lord such-a-one, that praised
my lord such-a-ones horse when he meant to beg it, might it not?
Ay, my lord.
Why, een so: and now my Lady Worms; chapless, and knocked
about the mazard with a sextons spade. Heres fine revolution, an we
had the trick to seet. Did these bones cost no more the breeding but
to play at loggets with em? Mine ache to think ont.
 A pickaxe and a spade, a spade, For and a
shrouding-sheet; O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is
meet.
 
Theres another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and
his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about
battery? Hum. This fellow might be ins time a great buyer of land,
with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
his recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his
recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers
vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the
length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his
lands will scarcely lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself
have no more, ha?
Not a jot more, my lord.
Is not parchment made of sheep-skins?
Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.
They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I
will speak to this fellow.Whose graves this, sir?
Mine, sir.  O, a pit of clay for to be made For
such a guest is meet.
I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest int.
You lie out ont, sir, and therefore tis not yours. For
my part, I do not lie int, yet it is mine.
Thou dost lie int, to be int and say it is thine. Tis for
the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
Tis a quick lie, sir; t will away again from me to you.
What man dost thou dig it for?
For no man, sir.
What woman then?
For none neither.
Who is to be buried int?
One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, shes dead.
How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, these three years I
have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe.How
long hast thou been a grave-maker?
Of all the days i th year, I came tot that day that our
last King Hamlet oercame Fortinbras.
How long is that since?
Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
very day that young Hamlet was born,he that is mad, and sent into
England.
Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?
Why, because he was mad; he shall recover his wits there;
or if he do not, its no great matter there.
Why?
Twill not be seen in him there; there the men are as mad
as he.
How came he mad?
Very strangely, they say.
How strangely?
Faith, een with losing his wits.
Upon what ground?
Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and
boy, thirty years.
How long will a man lie i thearth ere he rot?
Faith, if he be not rotten before he die,as we have many
pocky corses nowadays that will scarce hold the laying in,he will last
you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last you nine year.
Why he more than another?
Why, sir, his hide is so tannd with his trade that he
will keep out water a great while. And your water is a sore decayer of
your whoreson dead body. Heres a skull now; this skull hath lain in
the earth three-and-twenty years.
Whose was it?
A whoreson, mad fellows it was. Whose do you think it
was?
Nay, I know not.
A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! A pourd a flagon of
Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yoricks skull, the
Kings jester.
This?
Een that.
Let me see.  Alas, poor Yorick. I knew him,
Horatio, a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath
borne me on his back a thousand times; and now, how abhorred in my
imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips that I
have kissd I know not how oft. Where be your gibes now? your gambols?
your songs? your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table
on a roar? Not one now, to mock your own grinning? Quite chop-fallen?
Now get you to my ladys chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch
thick, to this favour she must come. Make her laugh at that.Prythee,
Horatio, tell me one thing.
Whats that, my lord?
Dost thou think Alexander looked o this fashion i thearth?
Een so.
And smelt so? Pah!
 
Een so, my lord.
To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not
imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it stopping
a bung-hole?
Twere to consider too curiously to consider so.
No, faith, not a jot. But to follow him thither with modesty
enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus. Alexander died, Alexander
was buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth
we make loam; and why of that loam whereto he was converted might they
not stop a beer-barrel? Imperious Caesar, dead and turnd to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away. O, that that earth which kept
the world in awe Should patch a wall texpel the winters flaw. But
soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King.
 Mourners following; King, Queen, their Trains, &c.
The Queen, the courtiers. Who is that they follow? And with such maimed
rites? This doth betoken The corse they follow did with desperate hand
Fordo it own life. Twas of some estate. Couch we awhile and mark.
 
What ceremony else?
That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.
What ceremony else?
Her obsequies have been as far enlargd As we have warranties.
Her death was doubtful; And but that great command oersways the order,
She should in ground unsanctified have lodgd Till the last trumpet.
For charitable prayers, Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on
her. Yet here she is allowed her virgin rites, Her maiden strewments,
and the bringing home Of bell and burial.
Must there no more be done?
No more be done. We should profane the service of the dead To
sing sage requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls.
Lay her i thearth, And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
May violets spring. I tell thee, churlish priest, A ministring angel
shall my sister be When thou liest howling.
What, the fair Ophelia?
 Sweets to the sweet. Farewell. I hopd
thou shouldst have been my Hamlets wife; I thought thy bride-bed to
have deckd, sweet maid, And not have strewd thy grave.
O, treble woe Fall ten times treble on that cursed head Whose
wicked deed thy most ingenious sense Deprivd thee of. Hold off the
earth a while, Till I have caught her once more in mine arms. Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, Till of
this flat a mountain you have made, To oertop old Pelion or the skyish
head Of blue Olympus.
 What is he whose grief Bears such an emphasis?
whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandring stars, and makes them
stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane. 
 The devil take thy soul!
Thou prayst not well. I prythee take thy fingers from my
throat; For though I am not splenative and rash, Yet have I in me
something dangerous, Which let thy wiseness fear. Away thy hand!
Pluck them asunder.
Hamlet! Hamlet!
All. Gentlemen!
Good my lord, be quiet.
Why, I will fight with him upon this theme Until my eyelids
will no longer wag.
O my son, what theme?
I lovd Ophelia; forty thousand brothers Could not, with all
their quantity of love, Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
O, he is mad, Laertes.
For love of God forbear him!
Swounds, show me what thoult do: Woult weep? woult fight?
woult fast? woult tear thyself? Woult drink up eisel? eat a
crocodile? Ill dot. Dost thou come here to whine? To outface me with
leaping in her grave? Be buried quick with her, and so will I. And if
thou prate of mountains, let them throw Millions of acres on us, till
our ground, Singeing his pate against the burning zone, Make Ossa like
a wart. Nay, an thoult mouth, Ill rant as well as thou.
This is mere madness: And thus awhile the fit will work on him;
Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are
disclosd, His silence will sit drooping.
Hear you, sir; What is the reason that you use me thus? I lovd
you ever. But it is no matter. Let Hercules himself do what he may, The
cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
 
I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
 
 Strengthen your patience in our last nights speech;
Well put the matter to the present push. Good Gertrude, set some
watch over your son. This grave shall have a living monument. An hour
of quiet shortly shall we see; Till then in patience our proceeding be.
 
So much for this, sir. Now let me see the other; You do
remember all the circumstance?
Remember it, my lord!
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting That would not
let me sleep. Methought I lay Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes.
Rashly, And praisd be rashness for it,let us know, Our indiscretion
sometime serves us well, When our deep plots do pall; and that should
teach us Theres a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we
will.
That is most certain.
Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarfd about me, in the dark
Gropd I to find out them; had my desire, Fingerd their packet, and in
fine, withdrew To mine own room again, making so bold, My fears
forgetting manners, to unseal Their grand commission; where I found,
sorts of reasons, Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too, With
ho! such bugs and goblins in my life, That on the supervise, no leisure
bated, No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, My head should be
struck off.
Ist possible?
Heres the commission, read it at more leisure. But wilt thou
hear me how I did proceed?
I beseech you.
Being thus benetted round with villanies, Or I could make a
prologue to my brains, They had begun the play,I sat me down, Devisd
a new commission, wrote it fair: I once did hold it, as our statists
do, A baseness to write fair, and labourd much How to forget that
learning; but, sir, now It did me yeomans service. Wilt thou know The
effect of what I wrote?
Ay, good my lord.
An earnest conjuration from the King, As England was his
faithful tributary, As love between them like the palm might flourish,
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear And stand a comma tween
their amities, And many such-like ases of great charge, That on the
view and know of these contents, Without debatement further, more or
less, He should the bearers put to sudden death, Not shriving-time
allowd.
How was this seald?
Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. I had my fathers signet
in my purse, Which was the model of that Danish seal: Folded the writ
up in the form of the other, Subscribd it: gavet thimpression;
placd it safely, The changeling never known. Now, the next day Was our
sea-fight, and what to this was sequent Thou knowst already.
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go tot.
Why, man, they did make love to this employment. They are not
near my conscience; their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow.
Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell
incensed points Of mighty opposites.
Why, what a king is this!
Does it not, thinkst thee, stand me now upon, He that hath
killd my king, and whord my mother, Poppd in between thelection and
my hopes, Thrown out his angle for my proper life, And with such
cozenageist not perfect conscience To quit him with this arm? And
ist not to be damnd To let this canker of our nature come In further
evil?
It must be shortly known to him from England What is the issue
of the business there.
It will be short. The interim is mine; And a mans lifes no
more than to say One. But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to
Laertes I forgot myself; For by the image of my cause I see The
portraiture of his. Ill court his favours. But sure the bravery of his
grief did put me Into a towring passion.
Peace, who comes here?
Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.
I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this waterfly?
No, my good lord.
Thy state is the more gracious; for tis a vice to know him. He
hath much land, and fertile; let a beast be lord of beasts, and his
crib shall stand at the kings mess; tis a chough; but, as I say,
spacious in the possession of dirt.
Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart a
thing to you from his Majesty.
I will receive it with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet
to his right use; tis for the head.
I thank your lordship, tis very hot.
No, believe me, tis very cold, the wind is northerly.
It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
Methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry,as twereI cannot tell
how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid
a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter,
I beseech you, remember,
 
Nay, in good faith; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of
most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing.
Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of
gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of what part a
gentleman would see.
Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you, though I know,
to divide him inventorially would dizzy tharithmetic of memory, and
yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity
of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great article and his infusion
of such dearth and rareness as, to make true diction of him, his
semblable is his mirror and who else would trace him his umbrage,
nothing more.
Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
rawer breath?
Sir?
Ist not possible to understand in another tongue? You will
dot, sir, really.
What imports the nomination of this gentleman?
Of Laertes?
His purse is empty already, alls golden words are spent.
Of him, sir.
I know you are not ignorant,
I would you did, sir; yet in faith if you did, it would not
much approve me. Well, sir?
You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is,
I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in
excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.
I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him,
by them in his meed hes unfellowed.
Whats his weapon?
Rapier and dagger.
Thats two of his weapons. But well.
The King, sir, hath wagerd with him six Barbary horses, against
the which he has imponed, as I take it, six French rapiers and
poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the
carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the
hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.
What call you the carriages?
I knew you must be edified by the margin ere you had done.
The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
The phrase would be more german to the matter if we could carry
cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then. But on. Six
Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three
liberal conceited carriages: thats the French bet against the Danish.
Why is this all imponed, as you call it?
The King, sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes between you and
him, he shall not exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for
nine. And it would come to immediate trial if your lordship would
vouchsafe the answer.
How if I answer no?
I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty, it
is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be brought, the
gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose, I will win for him if
I can; if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.
Shall I re-deliver you een so?
To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.
I commend my duty to your lordship.
Yours, yours.
 
He does well to commend it himself, there are no tongues else fors
turn.
This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
He did comply with his dug before he suckd it. Thus has
he,and many more of the same bevy that I know the drossy age dotes
on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a
kind of yeasty collection, which carries them through and through the
most fanned and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial,
the bubbles are out,
My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who
brings back to him that you attend him in the hall. He sends to know if
your pleasure hold to play with Laertes or that you will take longer
time.
I am constant to my purposes, they follow the Kings pleasure.
If his fitness speaks, mine is ready. Now or whensoever, provided I be
so able as now.
The King and Queen and all are coming down.
In happy time.
The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to Laertes
before you fall to play.
She well instructs me.
 
You will lose this wager, my lord.
I do not think so. Since he went into France, I have been in
how ill alls here about my heart: but it is no matter.
Nay, good my lord.
It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giving as
would perhaps trouble a woman.
If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
repair hither, and say you are not fit.
Not a whit, we defy augury. Theres a special providence in the
fall of a sparrow. If it be now, tis not to come; if it be not to
come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The readiness
is all. Since no man has aught of what he leaves, what ist to leave
betimes?
Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong; But pardont
as you are a gentleman. This presence knows, and you must needs have
might your nature, honour, and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim
was madness. Wast Hamlet wrongd Laertes? Never Hamlet. If Hamlet from
himself be taen away, And when hes not himself does wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it. Who does it, then? His
madness is poor Hamlets enemy. Sir, in this audience, Let my
disclaiming from a purposd evil Free me so far in your most generous
thoughts That I have shot my arrow oer the house And hurt my brother.
I am satisfied in nature, Whose motive in this case should
stir me most To my revenge. But in my terms of honour I stand aloof,
and will no reconcilement Till by some elder masters of known honour I
have a voice and precedent of peace To keep my name ungord. But till
that time I do receive your offerd love like love, And will not wrong
it.
I embrace it freely, And will this brothers wager frankly
play. Give us the foils; come on.
Come, one for me.
Ill be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance Your skill shall
like a star i th darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.
You mock me, sir.
No, by this hand.
Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet, You know the
wager?
Very well, my lord. Your Grace has laid the odds o the weaker
side.
I do not fear it. I have seen you both; But since he is betterd,
we have therefore odds.
This is too heavy. Let me see another.
This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
 
Ay, my good lord.
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. If Hamlet give the
first or second hit, Or quit in answer of the third exchange, Let all
the battlements their ordnance fire; The King shall drink to Hamlets
better breath, And in the cup an union shall he throw Richer than that
which four successive kings In Denmarks crown have worn. Give me the
cups; And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the
cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth,
Now the King drinks to Hamlet. Come, begin. And you, the judges, bear
a wary eye.
Come on, sir.
Come, my lord.
 
One.
No.
Judgment.
A hit, a very palpable hit.
Well; again.
Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine; Heres to thy
health.

Give him the cup.
Ill play this bout first; set it by awhile.
 
Come. Another hit; what say you?
A touch, a touch, I do confess.
Our son shall win.
Hes fat, and scant of breath. Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub
thy brows. The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
Good madam.
Gertrude, do not drink.
I will, my lord; I pray you pardon me.
 It is the poisond cup; it is too late.
I dare not drink yet, madam. By and by.
Come, let me wipe thy face.
My lord, Ill hit him now.
I do not thinkt.
 And yet tis almost gainst my conscience.
Come for the third, Laertes. You do but dally. I pray you pass
with your best violence. I am afeard you make a wanton of me.
Say you so? Come on.
 
Nothing neither way.
Have at you now.
Part them; they are incensd.
Nay, come again!
 
Look to the Queen there, ho!
They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
How ist, Laertes?
Why, as a woodcock to my own springe, Osric. I am justly
killd with mine own treachery.
How does the Queen?
She swoons to see them bleed.
No, no, the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet! The drink, the
drink! I am poisond.
 
O villany! Ho! Let the door be lockd: Treachery! Seek it out.
 
It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain. No medicine in the
world can do thee good. In thee there is not half an hour of life; The
treacherous instrument is in thy hand, Unbated and envenomd. The foul
Thy mothers poisond. I can no more. The King, the Kings to blame.
The point envenomd too! Then, venom, to thy work.
 
OSRIC and LORDS. Treason! treason!
O yet defend me, friends. I am but hurt.
Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane, Drink off this
potion. Is thy union here? Follow my mother.
 
He is justly servd. It is a poison temperd by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet. Mine and my fathers death
come not upon thee, Nor thine on me.
 
Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee. I am dead, Horatio.
Wretched Queen, adieu. You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest,O, I could tell you,
But let it be. Horatio, I am dead, Thou livst; report me and my cause
aright To the unsatisfied.
Never believe it. I am more an antique Roman than a Dane.
Heres yet some liquor left.
As thart a man, Give me the cup. Let go; by Heaven, Ill
havet. O good Horatio, what a wounded name, Things standing thus
unknown, shall live behind me. If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile, And in this harsh world draw thy
breath in pain, To tell my story.
What warlike noise is this?
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland, To the
ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley.
O, I die, Horatio. The potent poison quite oer-crows my
spirit: I cannot live to hear the news from England, But I do prophesy
thelection lights On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice. So tell him,
with the occurrents more and less, Which have solicited. The rest is
silence.
 
Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince, And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest. Why does the drum come hither?
 
Where is this sight?
What is it you would see? If aught of woe or wonder, cease
your search.
This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death, What feast is
toward in thine eternal cell, That thou so many princes at a shot So
bloodily hast struck?
The sight is dismal; And our affairs from England
come too late. The ears are senseless that should give us hearing, To
tell him his commandment is fulfilld, That Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern are dead. Where should we have our thanks?
Not from his mouth, Had it thability of life to thank you. He
never gave commandment for their death. But since, so jump upon this
bloody question, You from the Polack wars, and you from England Are
here arrivd, give order that these bodies High on a stage be placed to
the view, And let me speak to th yet unknowing world How these things
accidental judgments, casual slaughters, Of deaths put on by cunning
and forcd cause, And, in this upshot, purposes mistook Falln on the
inventors heads. All this can I Truly deliver.
Let us haste to hear it, And call the noblest to the
audience. For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune. I have some rights
of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim my vantage doth invite
me.
Of that I shall have also cause to speak, And from his mouth
whose voice will draw on more. But let this same be presently
performd, Even while mens minds are wild, lest more mischance On
plots and errors happen.
Let four captains Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on, To have provd most royally; and
for his passage, The soldiers music and the rites of war Speak loudly
for him. Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this Becomes the field,
but here shows much amiss. Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
